The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Little Review, June-July 1916 (Vol. 3, No. 4)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Little Review, June-July 1916 (Vol. 3, No. 4)

Author: Various

Editor: Margaret C. Anderson

Release date: April 14, 2025 [eBook #75854]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago, New York: Apparently none other than the Editor (see above), 1922

Credits: Jens Sadowski and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. This book was produced from images made available by the Modernist Journal Project, Brown and Tulsa Universities.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE REVIEW, JUNE-JULY 1916 (VOL. 3, NO. 4) ***





                           THE LITTLE REVIEW


                       Literature Drama Music Art

                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON
                                 EDITOR

                            JUNE-JULY, 1916

        Malmaison                                     Amy Lowell
        The Philosopher                        Sherwood Anderson
        Song of the Killing of Liars                Richard Hunt
        Mlle. Poetry Meets Me at the                Roscoe Brink
           Church                                               
        Silhouettes                                 Harriet Dean
        Our Migratory Address                                   
        Psycho-Analysis                     Florence Kiper Frank
        A Dyptich:                              Skipwith Cannell
          Wonder Song                                           
          Scorn                                                 
          The Deeper Scorn                                      
        Hokku                                  Edgar Lee Masters
        Poems:                                    Mark Turbyfill
          Thin Day                                              
          The Rose Jar                                          
        The Irish Revolutionists                   Padraic Colum
        Bring Out Your Dead:                                    
          Braithwaites Death-Cart                Mitchell Dawson
          Tree’s “Merchant of Venice”               Rollo Peters
        Some Imagist Poets, 1916                      Mary Aldis
        Three Imagist Poets                  John Gould Fletcher
        The Reader Critic                                       
        A Vers Libre Prize Contest                              

                           Published Monthly

                            15 cents a copy

                    MARGARET C. ANDERSON, Publisher
                            Montgomery Block
                          SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.

                              $1.50 a year

   Entered as second-class matter at Postoffice, San Francisco, Cal.




                           THE LITTLE REVIEW


                                VOL. III

                            JUNE-JULY, 1916

                                 NO. 4

                Copyright, 1916, by Margaret C. Anderson




                               Malmaison


                               AMY LOWELL


                                   I

How the slates of the roof sparkle in the sun, over there, over there,
beyond the high wall! How quietly the Seine runs in loops and windings,
over there, over there, sliding through the green countryside! Like
ships of the line, stately with canvas, the tall clouds pass along the
sky, over the glittering roof, over the trees, over the looped and
curving river. A breeze quivers through the linden trees. Roses bloom at
Malmaison. Roses! Roses! But the road is dusty. Already the Citoyenne
Beauharnais wearies of her walk. Her skin is chalked and powdered with
dust, she smells dust, and behind the wall are roses! Roses with smooth
open petals, poised above rippling leaves.... Roses.... They have told
her so. The Citoyenne Beauharnais shrugs her shoulders and makes a
little face. She must mend her pace if she would be back in time for
dinner. Roses indeed! The guillotine more likely.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The tiered clouds float over Malmaison, and the slate roof sparkles in
the sun.


                                   II

Gallop! Gallop! The General brooks no delay. Make way, good people, and
scatter out of his path, you, and your hens, and your dogs, and your
children. The General is returned from Egypt, and is come in a calèche
and four to visit his new property. Throw open the gates, you, Porter of
Malmaison. Pull off your cap, my man, this is your master, the husband
of Madame. Faster! Faster! A jerk and a jingle and they are arrived, he
and she. Madame has red eyes. Fi! It is for joy at her husband’s return.
Learn your place, Porter. A gentleman here for two months? Fi! Fi, then!
Since when have you taken to gossiping? Madame may have a brother, I
suppose. That—all green, and red, and glitter, with flesh as dark as
ebony—that is a slave; a blood-thirsty, stabbing, slashing heathen, come
from the hot countries to cure your tongue of idle whispering.

                   *       *       *       *       *

A fine afternoon it is, with tall bright clouds sailing over the trees.

                   *       *       *       *       *

“Bonaparte, mon ami, the trees are golden like my star, the star I
pinned to your destiny when I married you. The gypsy, you remember her
prophecy. My dear friend, not here, the servants are watching; send them
away, and that flashing splendour, Roustan. Superb—Imperial, but.... My
dear, your arm is trembling; I faint to feel it touching me! No, no,
Bonaparte, not that—spare me that—did we not bury that last night! You
hurt me, my friend, you are so hot and strong. Not long, Dear, no, thank
God, not long.”

The looped river runs saffron, for the sun is setting. It is getting
dark. Dark. Darker. In the moonlight, the slate roof shines palely
milkily white.

The roses have faded at Malmaison, nipped by the frost. What need for
roses? Smooth, open petals—her arms. Fragrant, outcurved petals—her
breasts. He rises like a sun above her, stooping to touch the petals,
press them wider. Eagles. Bees. What are they to open roses! A little
shivering breeze runs through the linden trees, and the tiered clouds
blow across the sky like ships of the line, stately with canvas.


                                  III

The gates stand wide at Malmaison, stand wide all day. The gravel of the
avenue glints under the continual rolling of wheels. An officer gallops
up with his sabre clicking; a mameluke gallops down with his charger
kicking. Valets-de-pied run about in ones, and twos, and groups, like
swirled blown leaves. Tramp! Tramp! The guard is changing, and the
grenadiers off duty lounge out of sight, ranging along the roads toward
Paris.

The slate roof sparkles in the sun, but it sparkles milkily, vaguely,
the great glass-houses put out its shining. Glass, stone and onyx now
for the sun’s mirror. Much has come to pass at Malmaison. New rocks and
fountains, blocks of carven marble, fluted pillars uprearing antique
temples, vases and urns in unexpected places, bridges of stone, bridges
of wood, arbours and statues, and a flood of flowers everywhere, new
flowers, rare flowers, parterre after parterre of flowers. Indeed, the
roses bloom at Malmaison. It is youth, youth untrammeled and advancing,
trundling a country ahead of it as though it were a hoop. Laughter, and
spur janglings in tesselated vestibules. Tripping of clocked and
embroidered stockings in little low-heeled shoes over smooth grassplots.
India muslins spangled with silver patterns slide through
trees—mingle—separate—white day-fireflies flashing moon-brilliance in
the shade of foliage.

“The kangeroos! I vow, Captain, I must see the kangeroos.”

“As you please, dear Lady, but I recommend the shady linden alley and
feeding the cockatoos.”

“They say that Madame Bonaparte’s breed of sheep is the best in all
France.”

“And, oh, have you seen the enchanting little cedar she planted when the
First Consul sent home the news of the victory of Marengo?”

Picking, choosing, the chattering company flits to and fro. Over the
trees the great clouds go, tiered, stately, like ships of the line
bright with canvas.

Prisoner’s-base, and its swooping, veering, racing, giggling, bumping.
The First Consul runs plump into M. de Beauharnais and falls. But he
picks himself up smartly, and starts after M. Isabey. Too late, M. Le
Premier Consul, Mademoiselle Hortense is out after you. Quickly, my dear
Sir! Stir your short legs, she is swift and eager, and as graceful as
her mother. She is there, that other, playing too, but lightly, warily,
bearing herself with care, rather floating out upon the air than
running, never far from goal. She is there, borne up above her guests as
something indefinably fair, a rose above periwinkles. A blown rose,
smooth as satin, reflexed, one loosened petal hanging back and down. A
rose that undulates languorously as the breeze takes it, resting upon
its leaves in a faintness of perfume.

                   *       *       *       *       *

There are rumours about the First Consul. Malmaison is full of women,
and Paris is only two leagues distant. Madame Bonaparte stands on the
wooden bridge at sunset, and watches a black swan pushing the pink and
silver water in front of him as he swims, crinkling its smoothness into
pleats of changing colour with his breast. Madame Bonaparte presses
against the parapet of the bridge, and the crushed roses at her belt
melt, petal by petal, into the pink water.


                                   IV

A vile day, Porter. But keep your wits about you. The Empress will soon
be here. Queer, without the Emperor! It is indeed, but best not consider
that. Scratch your head and prick up your ears. Divorce is not for you
to debate about. She is late? Ah, well, the roads are muddy. The rain
spears are as sharp as whetted knives. They dart down and down, edged
and shining. Clop-trop! Clop-trop! A carriage grows out of the mist.
Hist, Porter. You can keep on your hat. It is only Her Majesty’s dogs
and her parrot. Clop-trop! The Ladies in Waiting, Porter. Clop-trop! It
is Her Majesty. At least, I suppose it is, but the blinds are drawn.

“In all the years I have served Her Majesty she never before passed the
gate without giving me a smile!”

“You’re a droll fellow, to expect the Empress to put out her head in the
pouring rain and salute you. She has affairs of her own to think about.”

Clang the gate, no need for further waiting, nobody else will be coming
to Malmaison tonight.

White under her veil, drained and shaking, the woman crosses the
antechamber. Empress! Empress! Foolish splendour, perished to dust.
Ashes of roses, ashes of youth. Empress forsooth!

Over the glass domes of the hot houses drenches the rain. Behind her a
clock ticks—ticks again. The sound knocks upon her thought with the
echoing shudder of hollow vases. She places her hands on her ears, but
the minutes pass, knocking. Tears in Malmaison. And years to come each
knocking by, minute after minute. Years, many years, and tears, and cold
pouring rain.

“I feel as though I had died, and the only sensation I have is that I am
no more.”

Rain! Heavy, thudding rain!


                                   V

The roses bloom at Malmaison. And not only roses. Tulips, myrtles,
geraniums, camellias, rhododendrons, dahlias, double hyacinths. All the
year through, under glass, under the sky, flowers bud, expand, die, and
give way to others, always others. From distant countries they have been
brought, and taught to live in the cool temperateness of France. There
is the _Bonapartea_ from Peru; the _Napoleone Impériale_; the
_Josephinia Imperatrix_, a pearl-white flower, purple-shadowed, the
calix pricked out with crimson points. Malmaison wears its flowers as a
lady wears her gems, flauntingly, assertively. Malmaison decks herself
to hide the hollow within.

The glass-houses grow and grow and every year fling up hotter reflexions
to the sailing sun.

The cost runs into millions, but a woman must have something to console
herself for a broken heart. One can play backgammon and patience, and
then patience and backgammon, and stake gold Napoleons on each game won.
Sport truly! It is an unruly spirit which could ask better. With her
jewels, her laces, her shawls; her two hundred and twenty dresses, her
fichus, her veils; her pictures, her busts, her birds. It is absurd that
she cannot be happy. The Emperor smarts under the thought of her
ingratitude. What could he do more? And yet she spends, spends as never
before. It is ridiculous. Can she not enjoy life at a smaller figure?
Was ever monarch plagued with so extravagant an ex-wife? She owes her
chocolate-merchant, her candle-merchant, her sweetmeat purveyor; her
grocer, her butcher, her poulterer; her architect, and the shopkeeper
who sells her rouge; her perfumer, her dressmaker, her merchant of
shoes. She owes for fans, plants, engravings, and chairs. She owes
masons and carpenters, vintners, lingères. The lady’s affairs are in sad
confusion.

And why? Why?

Can a river flow when the spring is dry?

                   *       *       *       *       *

Night. The Empress sits alone, and the clock ticks, one after one. The
clock nicks off the edges of her life. She is chipped like an old bit of
china; she is frayed like a garment of last year’s wearing. She is soft,
crinkled, like a fading rose. And each minute flows by brushing against
her, shearing off another and another petal. The Empress crushes her
breasts with her hands, and weeps. And the tall clouds sail over
Malmaison like a procession of stately ships bound for the moon.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Scarlet, clear-blue, purple epauletted with gold. It is a parade of
soldiers sweeping up the avenue. Eight horses, eight Imperial harnesses,
four caparisoned postillions, a carriage with the Emperor’s arms on the
panels. Ho, Porter, pop out your eyes, and no wonder. Where else under
the Heavens could you see such splendour!

They sit on a stone seat. The little man in the green coat of a colonel
of Chasseurs, and the lady, beautiful as a satin seedpod, and as pale.
The house has memories. The satin seedpod holds his germs of Empire. We
will stay here, under the blue sky and the turreted white clouds. She
draws him; he feels her faded loveliness urge him to replenish it. Her
soft transparent texture woos his nervous fingering. He speaks to her of
debts, of resignation; of her children, and his; he promises that she
shall see the King of Rome; he says some harsh things and some pleasant.
But she is there, close to him, rose toned to amber, white shot with
violet, pungent to his nostrils as embalmed rose-leaves in a twilit
room.

Suddenly the Emperor calls his carriage and rolls away across the
looping Seine.


                                   VI

Crystal-blue brightness over the glass-houses. Crystal-blue streaks and
ripples over the lake. A macaw on a gilded perch screams; they have
forgotten to take out his dinner. The windows shake. Boom! Boom! It is
the rumbling of Prussian cannon beyond Pecq. Roses bloom at Malmaison.
Roses! Roses! Swimming above their leaves, rotting beneath them. Fallen
flowers strew the unraked walks. Fallen flowers for a fallen Emperor!
The General in charge of him draws back and watches. Snatches of
music—snarling, sneering music of bagpipes. They say a Scotch regiment
is besieging St. Denis. The Emperor wipes his face, or is it his eyes?
His tired eyes which see nowhere the grace they long for. Josephine!
Somebody asks him a question, he does not answer, somebody else does
that. There are voices, but one voice he does not hear, and yet he hears
it all the time. Josephine! The Emperor puts up his hand to screen his
face. The white light of a bright cloud spears sharply through the
linden trees. “Vive l’Empereur!” There are troops passing beyond the
wall, troops which sing and call. Boom! A pink rose is jarred off its
stem and falls at the Emperor’s feet.

“Very well. I go.” Where! Does it matter? There is no sword to clatter.
Nothing but soft brushing gravel and a gate which shuts with a click.

“Quick, fellow, don’t spare your horses.”

A whip cracks, wheels turn, why burn one’s eyes following a fleck of
dust.


                                  VII

Over the slate roof tall clouds, like ships of the line, pass along the
sky. The glass-houses glitter splotchily, for many of their lights are
broken. Roses bloom, fiery cinders quenching under damp weeds. Wreckage
and misery, and a trailing of petty deeds smearing over old
recollections.

The musty rooms are empty and their shutters are closed, only in the
gallery there is a stuffed black swan, covered with dust. When you touch
it the feathers come off and float softly to the ground. Through a chink
in the shutters one can see the stately clouds crossing the sky toward
the Roman arches of the Marley Aqueduct.




                            The Philosopher


                           SHERWOOD ANDERSON

He was an old man with a white beard and huge nose and hands. Long
before the time during which we will know him he was a doctor, and drove
a jaded white horse from house to house through the streets of
Winesburg, Ohio. Later he married a girl who had money. She had been
left a large fertile farm when her father died. The girl was quiet,
tall, and dark, and to many people she seemed very beautiful. Everyone
in Winesburg wondered why she married the doctor. Within a year after
the marriage she died.

The knuckles of the doctor’s hands were extraordinarily large. When the
hands were closed they looked like clusters of unpainted wooden balls as
large as walnuts fastened together by steel rods. He smoked a cob pipe,
and after his wife’s death sat all day in his empty office close by a
window that was covered with cobwebs. He never opened the window. Once,
on a hot day in August, he tried but found it stuck fast, and after that
he forgot all about it.

Winesburg had forgotten the old man, but in Doctor Reefy there were the
seeds of something. Alone in his musty office in the Heffner block,
above the Paris Dry Goods Company’s store, he worked ceaselessly,
building up something that he himself destroyed. Little pyramids of
truth he erected and after erecting knocked them down again that he
might have the truths to erect other pyramids.

Doctor Reefy was a tall man who had worn one suit of clothes for ten
years. It was frayed at the sleeves and little holes had appeared at the
knees and elbows. In the office he wore also a linen duster with huge
pockets into which he continually stuffed scraps of paper. After some
weeks the scraps of paper became little hard round balls and when the
pockets were filled with these he dumped them out upon the floor. For
ten years he had but one friend, another old man named John Spaniard,
who owned a tree nursery. Sometimes in a playful mood old Doctor Reefy
took from his pockets a handful of the paper balls and threw them at the
nurseryman. “That is to confound you, you blithering old
sentimentalist,” he cried, shaking with laughter.

The story of Doctor Reefy and of his courtship of the tall dark girl,
who became his wife and left her money to him, is a very curious story.
It is delicious like the twisted little apples that grow in the orchards
of Winesburg. In the fall one walks in the orchards and the ground is
hard with frost underfoot. The apples have been taken from the trees by
the pickers. They have been put in barrels and shipped to the cities
where they will be eaten in apartments that are filled with books,
magazines, furniture and people. On the trees are only a few knarled
apples that the pickers have rejected. They look like the knuckles of
Doctor Reefy’s hands. One nibbles at them and they are delicious. Into a
little round place at the side of the apple has been gathered all its
sweetness. One runs from tree to tree over the frosted ground picking
the knarled, twisted apples and filling his pockets with them. Only the
few know the sweetness of the twisted apples.

The girl and Doctor Reefy began their courtship on a summer afternoon.
He was forty-five then and already he had begun the practice of filling
his pockets with the scraps of paper that became hard balls and were
thrown away. The habit had been formed as he sat in his buggy behind the
jaded gray horse and went slowly along country roads. On the papers were
written thoughts, ends of thoughts, beginnings of thoughts.

One by one the mind of Doctor Reefy had made the thoughts. Out of many
of them he formed a truth that rose gigantic in his mind. The truth
clouded the world. It became terrible and then faded away and the little
thoughts began again.

The tall dark girl came to see Doctor Reefy because she was going to
have a child and had become frightened. She was in that condition
because of a series of circumstances also curious.

The death of her father and mother and the rich acres of land that had
come down to her had set a train of suitors on her heels. For two years
she saw suitors almost every evening. With the exception of two they
were all alike. They talked to her of passion and there was a strained
eager quality in their voices and in their eyes when they looked at her.
The two who were different were much unlike the others. One of them, a
slender young man with white hands, the son of a jeweler in Winesburg,
talked continually of virginity. When he was with her he was never off
the subject. The other, a black-haired boy with large ears, said nothing
at all, but always managed to get her into the darkness where he began
to kiss her.

For a time the tall dark girl thought she would marry the jeweler’s son.
For hours she sat in silence listening as he talked, and then she began
to be afraid of something. Beneath his talk of virginity she began to
think there was a lust greater than in all of the others. At times it
seemed to her that as he talked he was holding her body in his hands.
She imagined him turning it slowly about in the white hands and staring
at it. At night she dreamed that he had bitten into her body and that
his jaws were dripping. She had the dream three times, then she became
pregnant by the one who said nothing at all, but who in the moment of
his passion actually did bite her shoulder so that for days the marks of
his teeth showed.

After the tall dark girl came to know Doctor Reefy it seemed to her that
she never wanted to leave him again. She went into his office in the
morning and without her saying anything he seemed to know what had
happened to her.

In the office of the doctor there was a woman, the wife of the man who
kept the bookstore in Winesburg. Like all old-fashioned country
practitioners Doctor Reefy pulled teeth, and the woman who waited held a
handkerchief to her teeth and groaned. Her husband was with her and when
the tooth was taken out they both screamed and blood ran down on the
woman’s white dress. The tall dark girl did not pay any attention. When
the woman and the man had gone the doctor smiled. “I will take you
driving into the country with me,” he said.

For several weeks the tall dark girl and the doctor were together almost
every day. The condition that had brought her to him passed in an
illness, but she was like one who has discovered the sweetness of the
twisted apples and could not again get her mind fixed again upon the
round perfect fruit that is eaten in the apartments. In the fall after
the beginning of her acquaintanceship with him she married Doctor Reefy
and in the following spring she died. During the winter he read to her
all the odds and ends of thoughts he had scribbled on the bits of paper.
After he had read them he laughed and stuffed them away in his pockets
to become round hard balls.




                      Song of the Killing of Liars


                              RICHARD HUNT

   My hands have grown strong
   Wanting to clutch throats.
   I have looked about me, Love,
   And you are the only one
   I do not want to kill.

   They tried to kill me
   When I was young and helpless:
   They almost did for me,
   And I cannot forgive them.

   Whom shall I choke first?—
   The minister who told me a piece of bread
   Was Christ’s body to be chewed weepingly?
   Or my father who nearly frightened me to death
   Because I dreamed about a girl?
   Then there is my old teacher
   Who made me write five hundred times,
   “A man’s first duty is to his flag.”

   Liars!

   First I will insult them
   And strip them naked of their lies:
   Then I will choke them dead,
   And burn their institutions.

   There will be nothing left
   But the clean earth and some children—
   Our child, Love, and a child for it to mate with.
   The air they breathe will be pure
   For the lies will be all dead.




                  Mlle. Poetry Meets Me at the Church


                          ROSCOE WILLIAM BRINK

To a New York poetry society one night with a friend of a friend.... I
had always wanted to see that society. Long have I listened in awe to
the unutterable rhythms of the city itself: the daily ictus of the
workward crowds in the morning, the beat again in the homeward evening,
lyric activity of the weeks rising to a crest like an Elizabethan sonnet
to end in a Saturday-Sunday couplet of application to the heart of man,
involved quatrains of the seasons, free verse epochs and tensions, years
and decades. As I listened to these bigger canticles of New York City I
have wanted to see its poetry society, fancying it some homely cricket
on its communal hearth—my pleasant heart-warming dream. You see, also,
besides listening in on this great, loud city voice, I once wanted to
write poetry myself—but that was long ago before, under penalty of death
by starvation, they took me and put me to work and rediscovered vers
libre.

As I sat beside the friend of a friend, gazing in glad surmise at an
elegant assembly of ladies and gentlemen, the poetry society meeting
came to order. Not since I was fourteen-fifteen, and went to
prayer-meeting because the girl I adored would be there, have I
experienced such emotions as I experienced then.

I don’t suppose you know my particular old white church prayer-meeting.
I used to go, rain or shine, every Friday night, and sit where I could
watch the door admit the pretty upward toss of curls of my affections’
desire. Sometimes she didn’t come and didn’t come. The opening hymn
would be sung and I would hear it not, for my eyes were upon the door.
Another hymn and the preacher would begin to speak with a gentle,
gushing, splashing sound at the mouth, but the door would remain closed;
and knotted, stifling disappointment be clutching at my throat. Another
hymn, and the discussion would be thrown open to the congregation. Well,
the door was stolid; I would slide back from the edge of my chair and
breathe thickly of the resisting air. So late, she would not come now.
To be sure, the congregation was some comfort: there were the frisky
young lady and the frisky middle-aged lady who would pop to their feet
with a squeal of enthusiasm, the deacons and the elders, the sincere
girls, the succinct young men with a duty to perform, the conservatives
and the infirm—all of them to speak. There came one night when there was
rejoicing in heaven’s hour. Somebody had sent a check to pay for a new
coat of white paint for the church. The treasurer arose from his chair
and lifted up the check for all to see. Then were hymns and glad talks
with God and with woman and man. The banks next day refused to honor the
check.

In the New York poetry society meeting appeared no novelty for me. I had
been there before, so it seemed. Then, as of old, the meeting-room was
more charming, the congregation more elegant, but the same, even to the
frisky ones, with an exception in the authors’ literary agent I saw just
a few feet from me. Otherwise the same—a prayer-meeting, the great
American habit, a community impulse boiled down to four-square-wallsful.

As the meeting progressed I knew I had been there before. Absently I
looked toward the door for the pretty upward toss of curls again, but I
caught myself in time. Notices were read—again I looked toward the door,
and stopped. Jokes were made about vers libre; several very interesting
recitations were given; restlessly my eyes wandered doorward again. One
always forms such bad habits when he is young. Poems now were being
read, and criticized. But I had given up: I was looking toward the door
and willing to acknowledge it. But she for whom I looked, came not. Then
the leader with pleasure read a list of several new members—one of them
with the name of a certain rich person, a name I had often seen
associated with the millions of commerce but never with the measures of
verse. An uncrushed sigh of self-congratulation went up over the room. I
took my last look at the stolid door, slid back from the edge of my
chair; gave up. I knew She would not come. My heart beat as of old,
whimsically and sadly. She would not come.

I took my friend of a friend by the hand and sidled out of the room into
the night. A few corners away we came upon a news-stand, full of
magazines, upon every magazine a cover, upon every cover a girl, one and
the same forever and ever. “If She had come, would She have been so
grown that She would have looked like them?” I asked.

“Who come?” asked my friend of a friend.

“The Spirit of Poetry,” says I. “She hadda right, you know.”

American modernity, I bless thee through closed teeth—get thee to thy
prayer-meetings or some Billy Sunday will Carl Sanburg thee.




                              Silhouettes


                              HARRIET DEAN


                              Barn-Yarding

I cannot joyously write little things. Perhaps that is why I write none
at all. The little people about me fill me with disgust. They are
cocksure bantam hens, loose and fertile, laying egg-thoughts carelessly.
The crack of shells is loud, but tiny wet chicks roll out, smaller than
the rest. God forbid that I am of the same breed! If I must linger in
the barn-yard for a few days, studying the swagger of these hens and
silently measuring my own, may I in the end fly away to my
mountain-top—alone in the night. Strut, if I must, but quite alone.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Their voices are splinters of sound which prick my desolation to shreds.
My one great fear is that clumsily they may stumble against my
loneliness. What matter if the tongue be unknown to me! These tone
arrows beat at my door like undesired rain; they hurl themselves against
my tissue walls until I shall go mad with their urgence.

The only true friendliness near me is the blank brick wall of the house
next door. I wrap myself in its unresponsiveness and stop up my ears
with its cold silence that I may have courage to go on with my work.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Flame curtains flap in my grate and send grey indistinctness shivering
and stumbling over my walls.

A dusty mirror in a lonely house waits....


                               Departure

“And now you, too, must go,” she said to me; I who had already gone,
silently, tenderly lest my steps break the stairs of her heart.




                             Announcements


                        _The Migratory Magazine_

We have been invited to spend the summer in San Francisco, so we decided
to carry THE LITTLE REVIEW along and publish it there until October or
November. Then we shall go back to Chicago for a couple of months, and
by the first of the year we plan to establish ourselves in New York,
where all good things seem to turn at last. Our travels have been so
exciting that it was impossible to get out a June issue on the way. (In
all honesty I should add that the chronic low state of the treasury had
even more to do with it.) So we have combined the June and July issues,
as we did last year. Subscriptions will be extended accordingly.


                       _Charles Kinney’s Article_

Mr. Kinney’s exposure of conditions at the Chicago Art Institute, which
was advertised in the last issue, has not come in time to go in. The
court procedures have taken much of Mr. Kinney’s time. It will be
published in the August issue.




                            Psycho-Analysis


                      Some Random Thoughts Thereon

                          FLORENCE KIPER FRANK

Why not history rewritten from the researches of the Freudians? We have
our economic determinism; why not our psycho-sexual? The tendencies of
the individual studied in their relations to world-breaking and
world-making! Hannibal and his mother, Queen Elizabeth and her nurse,
Frederick the Great and the Oedipus complex!

The priest of the future will be the Inspired Physician. All tendencies
seem so to point. The Christian Scientist and New Thought healers are
vague and emotional answers to this social demand, the psycho-analytic
physician a more sophisticated and precise one. The functions of those
who now minister separately to soul and to body will, as in primitive
society, again be united. The modern medicine-man shall be the priest of
the new order!

To the adolescent, the value of the Inspired Physician can scarcely be
over-stated. Jeanne D’Orge has thus written of the sixteen-year-old
period:

      I wish there were Someone
      Who would hear confession:
      Not a priest—I do not want to be told of my sins;
      Not a mother—I do not want to give sorrow;
      Not a friend—she would not know enough;
      Not a lover—he would be too partial;
      Not God—he is far away;
      But Someone that should be friend, lover, mother, priest, God all in
         one,
      And a Stranger besides—who would not condemn nor interfere,
      Who when everything is said from beginning to end
      Would show the reason of it all
      And tell you to go ahead
      And work it out your own way.

What of the functions of the physician-priest in marriage! The
possibilities are, to say the least, interesting. As substitute for the
churchly bunk talked at the average churchly ceremony, an intimate
tete-a-tete between, say, the Inspired Physician and the woman. It might
do much to validate the “sacredness” of wedlock. And, incidentally, I
wonder what data the Freudians are going to contribute during the next
ten years to feminism. Ellis states that sexual normality isn’t possible
to determine because there isn’t enough material by which to base a
norm. Especially, says he, is this true of the sexual psychology of
women. Valuable, then, will be the testimony of those who have been
hearing confessions!

One of the most powerful functions of the Catholic Church united with
modern scientific research! I wonder if the need for the confessional
isn’t eternal.

Amazing, isn’t it, that the most remarkable contributions to the study
of personality come out of the modern Prussianized Teutonic empires? On
the one hand men mowed down by the socialized thousands; on the other
this incredibly patient and exhaustive searching into the bewildering
complexities of the individual soul.

Break through the crust of any man as he thinks he is, and you are
plunged into currents undreamed of. And isn’t one amazed at how much
alike we all of us are—and how different!

The Freudian searching into motives is the accredited material of the
novelist; the use of dream symbols the very stuff of the poet. The
successful psycho-analytic physician ought to combine the adroitness of
the fictionist with the imagination of the versifier.

From the standpoint of medical technique Freud and Jung may have
diverged importantly—philosophically the younger man builds on the
Freudian researches and there is no break in the continuity. Freud is
perhaps more valuable to the physician; to the layman Jung opens up a
realm of speculation and discovery more fascinating than that of
Darwinism.

The old sweet mythos, as friend Browning says, has been rediscovered. We
are more wonderful than we thought. We are carrying about in our
compassed personalities all dreams and imaginings. What avails the
modernity of elevators and skyscrapers! You, betrousered one, walking
Michigan Avenue—in your psyche are the ancient Hindus and the dancing
sun-worshippers. You with the hand-bag and that 1916 model frock, do you
truly think you are thinking in terms of American asphalted Chicago?
Indeed! It was the symbolism of the Eleusinian mysteries that was used
in the image which flashed into your mind just then. How was it
recreated? Heaven knows—or Dr. Jung! And in your dreams, when the censor
is quite off guard—how did you, prosaic being, become suddenly the
wildest of poets?

The average man—by that I mean the average man of cultivation—is not at
all cognizant yet of the large significance of the psycho-analytic
studies. He thinks them some libidinous sex-stuff come out of Germany,
or perhaps one of the many new methods to be tried on the insane and the
neurotic. Their immense import for the normal (whatever _he_ is!) he has
not yet understood. It will take perhaps another five years, for the
discoveries of psycho-analysis to penetrate the popular consciousness.
Perhaps less—for some Augustus Thomas (God save us from such!) may
before then write a play about it.




                               A Dyptich


                            SKIPWITH CANNELL


                              Wonder Song

   No man who borrows
   Should return the exact debt;
   Let him return more,
   Or let him return less.

   I borrowed twelve dollars
   From a rich uncle of mine:
   I paid him back a hundred’s worth of poetry.

   He is not satisfied.
   I am not forgotten.

   I borrowed from a stranger
   An old coat full of lice;
   The cloth became strong serge,
   The lice became buttons.

   The stranger
   Wanted his old coat back again,
   He got an old joke instead
   And went away laughing.

   I gave my God some second-hand prayers,
   Prayers that were used and fingered and worn;
   In return He gave me
   My heart’s desire.

   I gave my God all the love that’s in me....
   He put it in His pocket,
   Absently,
   With talk of the weather:
   He’s a wise God, knowing His own worth.

   No one who borrows
   Should make exact payment;
   If he does as I say
   He’ll be remembered forever.


                                 Scorn

   I will not lay bricks for the homes of other men;
   I prefer to fell trees in the forest,
   To fell them and let them lie.
   If I go to the forests, I will starve;
   If I lay bricks for those others,
   They will feed me soup and black bread and onions.

   I will fell trees
   Angrily,
   And I will let them lie.


                            The Deeper Scorn

   I will lay many bricks:
   And that I may lay them better,
   I will take their bread and their soup ...
   Courteously returning thanks
   For the wages they offer....

   I will lay many bricks,
   And in a straight row,
   As befits one who has knowledge of his freedom.




                                 Hokku


                           EDGAR LEE MASTERS

   I lift my eyes from the humus
   Up the sea-green stalk to the flower.
   The base of the petals is red as blood;
   But I cannot see the line that divides
   The rim of the petals from the sun light.




                                 Poems


                             MARK TURBYFILL


                                Thin Day

   Bright, alert,
   Arise these wild blue buds
   Above this crystal jar.

   But they have no soul,
   And bear no sweetness
   On their lips.

   Oh pity of azure days
   Like these blue flowers!
   We cannot endure in their thinness:
   Our hearts sink
   Through their petal-gauze.


                              The Rose Jar

   O Earth,
   You have brought me out too soon!

   He whom I love
   Still clings upon the branch,
   Firm, a slender bud.
   But you have spread me wide.

   Take these broken leaves,
   Now fallen from the core.
   (O Earth,
   You have brought me out too soon!)
   Drop them into your Jar
   For him who shall surely pass this way,
   At last!




                        The Irish Revolutionists


                             PADRAIC COLUM

The British Government, which was quite willing to exploit the sympathy
felt here on the premature death of the young English poet, Rupert
Brooke, shot to death three Irish poets, Padraic Pearse, Thomas
MacDonagh, and Joseph Plunkett.

Not only in Ireland, but the whole world is at a loss by the extinction
of these three brave, honorable, and distinguished lives.

The English illustrated journals that have just come to New York enable
us to estimate by a contrast the world’s loss. They have published the
photographs of the Irish revolutionary leaders; and with them they have
published the photograph of the man who ordered their execution, General
Maxwell. On one side they give you intellectual and spiritual faces—the
faces of men who liberate the world. On the other side they give you a
heavy, non-intellectual, non-spiritual face—the face of a man who could
never liberate himself.

The vision and the aspiration of Pearse, MacDonagh, and Plunkett is on
record for the world to know. A man cannot lie when he speaks of his
vision or his aspiration in poetry. We know what Padraic Pearse thought
of personal life. He has recorded it in his poem _To Death_, which has
been translated from the Irish:

      I have not gathered gold;
      The fame that I won perished;
      In love I found but sorrow
              That withered my life.

      Of wealth or of glory
      I shall leave nothing behind me
      (I think it, O God, enough!)
              But my name in the heart of a child.

And what vision of life had Thomas MacDonagh? We know, for it is in his
poem _Wishes For My Son_:

      But I found no enemy,
      No man in a world of wrong,
      That Christ’s word of Charity
      Did not render clean and strong—
      Who was I to judge my kind,
      Blindest groper of the blind?

      God to you may give the sight
      And the clear undoubting strength
      Wars to knit for single right,
      Freedom’s war to knit at length;
      And to win, through wrath and strife,
      To the sequel of my life.

      But for you, so small and young,
      Born of Saint Cecilia’s Day,
      I in more harmonious song
      Now for nearer joys should pray—
      Simple joys: the natural growth
      Of your childhood and your youth,
      Courage, innocence, and truth:

      These for you, so small and young,
      In your hand and heart and tongue.

And we know the vision of life that Joseph Plunkett had—it was the same
vision that the great mystics and the great religious had. It is in his
poem _I See His Blood Upon the Roses_:

      I see his blood upon the rose
      And in the stars the glory of his eyes,
      His body gleams amid eternal snows,
      His tears fall from the skies.

      I see his face in every flower;
      The thunder and the singing of the birds
      Are but his voice—and carven by his power
      Rocks are his written words.

      All pathways by his feet are worn,
      His strong heart stirs the ever-beating sea,
      His crown of thorns is twined with every thorn,
      His cross is every tree.

These three men had a vision for their country that could not be
expressed in a proclamation, no matter how nobly worded that
proclamation might be.

Padraic Pearse gave all his thought and all his effort to bring back a
chivalry to Ireland—the Heroic Age of Celtic History, when, as he said,
“the greatest honor was for the hero with the most childlike heart, for
the King who had the largest pity, and for the poet who visioned the
truest image of beauty.” The first thing you saw when you entered his
school in Cullenswood House was a fresco representing the boy Cuchullain
taking arms. The Druid has warned him that the youth who takes arms that
day will make his name famous, but will have a short life. And written
round the fresco, in the old Irish words, was Cuchullain’s answer, “I
care not if my life have only the span of a day and a night if my deeds
be spoken of by the men of Ireland.” This was the spirit that Padraic
Pearse sought to kindle in his boys—this was the spirit that he tried to
bring back again into Ireland.

Thomas MacDonagh strove to create an Ireland that would be free as his
intelligence was free, as eager for deeds as he himself was eager. Those
who knew MacDonagh in his literary expression thought of him as a poet
with a tendency towards abstractions, as a scholar with a bent towards
philology. Those who knew him intimately knew him as a man who was the
best of comrades. And they knew that there was something in MacDonagh
that he never expressed. What was fundamental in him was an eager search
for the thing to which he could give the whole devotion of his life. He
found it in his vision of the Irish Republic.

Joseph Mary Plunkett strove to bring back the spirit and the defiance of
the martyrs. He came of a family whose name has been in Irish history
for six hundred years. The proudest memory of his people was the memory
of martyrdom. The last priest martyred in England—the Venerable Oliver
Plunkett—was of his blood.

These men, with their comrades—the good and brave Connolly, who gave all
of his will and all of his ability to the workers of Ireland, the
upright Eamonn Ceant, the soldierly O’Rahilly, the adventurous MacBride,
Shaun MacDermott, “kindly Irish of the Irish,” and the others—have done
a great thing for our country at this great moment of history.

They have made Ireland not a British question but a European question.

They have shown us that the country should be redeemed by the heroic
spirit as well as by the political intelligence.

They have belittled danger and death for generations of Irish
nationalists.




                          Bring Out Your Dead


                        Braithwaite’s Death-Cart

   _The Poetry Review of America, edited by William Stanley
                Braithwaite, Cambridge, Massachusetts._

The plague being upon us—God knows whence it came—the plague being upon
us, poisoning men and women, and turning them into minor and sub-minor
poets, and catching some in their youth so that they can never become
men and women—the plague being upon us, I suppose there must be men
brave enough to fashion death-carts for the corpses. It is a sanitary
precaution. The more carts the better. The builders should be commended;
the drivers medalled and ultimately pensioned. We should not bother much
about the wheels—how they bang and rattle. Let the corpses leer and
quarrel. But keep the carts well burdened and speed them to the pyres of
oblivion.

This is not criticism, but the exaggeration of bitterness; and you, Mr.
Braithwaite, should not complain if our lips writhe back at the cup
which you have held out to us and if our tongues are twisted to a
sincerity that sounds like malice. When _Contemporary Verse_ issued from
Philadelphia like an ancient tumbril reconstructed by children we
laughed and said, “God speed you while you last.” But when rumors came
of a new poetry magazine in Boston we waited with the wonderful hope of
eager youth. Ah, the new Poetry Review! The new Poetry Review! And what
have you done? You have given us the old doll without even new tinsel.
Do you wonder that I would smash your doll and tear its frayed and
tawdry clothing?

“To serve the art we all love,” you say. Does Benjamin R. C. Low serve
it with sentimental buncombe like _Jack O’Dreams_? Does Amelia Josephine
Burr serve it with a library tragedy like _Vengeance_? And you, Mr.
Braithwaite, do you serve it by writing a muddled article on _The
Substance of Poetry_? The bad grammar and proofreading can be forgiven,
but who can cleave his way through the jungle of incoherent thought? And
I may add seriously that Mr. Edwin F. Edgett, with his puerile remarks
about Shakespeare, sounds very much like your younger brother.

There is the beginning of service in the competently written criticisms
by Messrs. Untermeyer, O’Brien and Colum, and especially in the
tantalizing quotations in fine print from Donald Evan’s new book _Two_
_Deaths in the Bronx_. Amy Lowell contributes a short story in her
recent colloquial vein and Sara Teasdale a sincere lyric.

If live men and women have been sand-bagged and put in the death-cart,
let them awake and revive the corpses of their companions. Let them turn
the cart into a tally-ho and gallop on with daring and exuberance,
cracking a whip at critics.

I do not know your age, Mr. Braithwaite, but I feel that I have the
wisdom of greater youth. You have not quite killed hope in me, for I
know your true devotion to your work. What will you give us in the
forthcoming numbers of your magazine?

                                                      MITCHELL DAWSON.


                 Herbert Tree’s “_Merchant of Venice_”

Could I invent some acid, bitter-stinging speech, some new tongue far
beyond English in sharpness, I might begin to describe the spectacle of
incredible vulgarity—of miserable intent and culmination—which is to be
viewed upon the New Amsterdam stage this month. English shrinks—becomes
the prattled language of babes—at thought of it.

Is the great wind which has blown the dust from the theatres of Germany,
bearing Craig and Reinhart and Barker upon its back, echoing even here
in America, to be completely discounted, silenced, by this vulgarian,
this soulless, thoughtless, casual, shambling buffoon?

To _The Merchant of Venice_—a rambling, untidy comedy at best, a play
for reading, or only to be played by a man of genius—he brings a
graceless cast, a marvelous pot-pourri of music (tom-toms for “Morrocco”
and Spanish jingles for “Arragon”), a quite distended and “improved”
version of the original play, himself (God save us), and a theory of
decoration quite incomprehensibly fearful. Brown palaces shaking to the
conversation of the players—brown palaces with hangings of decayed
green, a sham, paper Venice, elaborately stenciled, a Portia in
landlady’s pink, a Jessica (a spirited Cockney girl) in Turkish costume,
roysterers garbed with all the delicate art of Timbuctoo, a Shylock in
old dressing gown. No detail, no fragment of the picture of vulgarity is
lacking—from red-plush curtains to modern rattle-jacks for the Carnival,
from mouthed speeches to maudlin groupings—a complete whole.

This to an apparently delighted audience, to a receptive press.

Barker departed from America, a semi-success, embittered towards us.
_The Weavers_, finely played and brilliantly produced, clung to the
shadow of an audience at the Garden Theatre, got as far as Chicago and
failed completely there. The two great things in the theatre of the past
year trodden out of sight of the easy public at the absurd and dolorous
prancing, at the loud cajoling of popularity of bourgeois neighbor Tree.

How long is the theatre to cling to ragged precedent; to these mournful
gentlemen of a dusty yesterday, raving through their paper and lattice
Venices, showing us their entrail-colored Belmonts, barring sun and
light and poetry and singing from the song-starved people of America?

                                                         ROLLO PETERS.




                      Some Imagist Poets, 1916[1]


                               MARY ALDIS

It is a matter of speculation why six poets of widely dissimilar
viewpoints, if similar technique, should choose to band themselves
together to publish in a yearly anthology selections from their works.

An examination into the prefaces and poems of the three anthologies sent
forth by the Imagists and a study of various articles on the subject by
individual members of the group fail to give adequate explanation.

The principle tenets of Imagism, i. e., clear presentation, the
abolishing of outworn phrases and extra adjectives, the necessity of
rhythm in all poetry, the absence of reflective comment, are those
common to most of the modern serious writers of verse; and although the
Imagists have done well to lay fresh emphasis on the difficulty and
desirability of putting these tenets into practice, this hardly
constitutes a new school. As for a definite understanding of the term
Imagism, God help the man who thinks he can explain to another its
meaning.

The Imagists, all six of them (there were more in the first anthology,
but seemingly some fell from grace), write poetry. That they choose to
employ a sub-title need not concern us; nor does their exposition of
certain theoretical ideals. What does concern us is the quality of the
poems they write. If it seems well to these six poets to publish
together a collection of chosen poems, let us pay our seventy-five cents
for the modest green paper volume, to read and re-read those that please
us best; or, let us go our way untroubled, giving our affection to safe
and sure collections—Rittenhouse, Braithwaite, or even good Edmund
Clarence Stedman.

There is a patient note discernible in the preface of this third volume
which seems to say, “Once again we will endeavor to make clear what we
are trying to do. Kindly make an effort to understand.” One may question
the desirability of any preface, but it is not surprising that the
Imagists wish to make clear their aims and purposes. One wonders at the
breath expended in attacks on them. There are disadvantages in this
banding together: if one of the group makes a misstep the whole six are
anathematized; but, after all, it is quite futile, this effort to kill
by ridicule. Denunciation, however fierce, has never yet crushed
anything which had in it the living flame of beauty, as much Imagist
poetry has.

Miss Amy Lowell is represented in this 1916 Anthology by three poems.
The first is her _Patterns_, named by Braithwaite as the first of the
five best poems of 1915. It is difficult to quote, as the poem must be
taken in its entirety to appreciate its beauty. Here are the first two
stanzas:

      I walk down the garden paths,
      And all the daffodils
      Are blowing, and the bright blue squills.
      I walk down the patterned garden paths
      In my stiff, brocaded gown.
      With my powdered hair and jewelled fan.
      I too am a rare
      Pattern. As I wander down
      The garden paths.

      My dress is richly figured,
      And the train
      Makes a pink and silver stain
      On the gravel, and the thrift
      Of the borders.
      Just a plate of current fashion,
      Tripping by in high-heeled, ribboned shoes.
      Not a softness anywhere about me,
      Only whale-bone and brocade.

Studying it again one finds new beauties—the delicacy of the occasional
rhyme, used as a musician uses the flute in an orchestra, the curious
“pattern” of the rhythm, which cannot be defined and yet fits the theme
with inimitable grace; the unforgettable picture of the garden with its
stiff paths, its white fountain, its carelessly gorgeous flowers, and
the woman walking down the path with slow and stately tread. Her head is
straight and high, pink and silver is her stiff brocaded gown, yet one
knows that underneath it throbs a human heart for which there is no
place in the pattern. Here is certainly a new way of conveying emotion.
We are stirred by the passion of the poem up to its terrible
climax—“Christ! what are patterns for?”

A masterpiece this poem, one to learn and repeat and make one’s own.
There follows by Miss Lowell _A Spring Day_ in polyphonic prose, a
series of word pictures scintillating with color and dancing light. The
day has five color divisions: the Bath, where “little spots of sunshine
lie on the surface of the water and dance, and their reflections wabble
deliciously over the ceiling”; the Breakfast Table, where golden coffee,
yellow butter and silver and white make another symphony. Then comes the
Walk, with more color, from boys with black and red, amber and blue
marbles, “spitting crimson” when they are hit, to a man’s hat careering
down the street in front of white dust “jarring the sunlight into spokes
of rose-color and green.” Next comes Midday and Afternoon, then Night
and Sleep. “Wrap me close, sheets of lavender. Pour your blue and purple
dreams into my ears.... Pale blue lavender, you are the color of the sky
when it is fresh-washed and fair.”

Miss Lowell also includes her amazing paraphrase of Stravinsky’s
_Grotesques_, too amazing for an unmusical person’s comment.

Richard Aldington has seven poems. The finest is a short Elizabethan
lyric named _After Two Years_. It is a lovely bit, but why it should be
published in an “Imagist” collection no man may say. Its delicate beauty
is indefinable.


                            After Two Years

      She is all so slight
      And tender and white
            As a May morning.
      She walks without hood
      At dusk. It is good
            To hear her sing.

      It is God’s will
      That I shall love her still
            As He loves Mary.
      And night and day
      I will go forth to pray
            That she loves me.

      She is as gold
      Lovely, and far more cold.
            Do thou pray with me,
      For if I win grace
      To kiss twice her face
            God has done well to me.

Aldington’s _Eros and Psyche_ has both beauty and distinction, but no
one of the seven poems by him can compare with his _Choricos_ in the
Anthology of 1915. That is an achievement not easily repeated.

Perhaps H. D. is the purest Imagist of the group. To the uninitiated she
is the most obscure because the most abstract. She loves the sea and
high, windy places and her poems catch something of the freshness one
feels standing on a headland, beaten and buffeted by the wind and the
salt spray. Nature is to her as a living presence, sometimes gentle,
more often cruel. She vibrates to beauty as sensitively as a Greek
dryad, and in reading her poems one has a curious sense of a worshipper
offering incense to the gods. Here are some lines from the last one of
the four poems she contributes. It is called _Temple—The Cliff_:

      High—high and no hill-goat
      Tramples—no mountain-sheep
      Has set foot on your fine grass.
      You lift, you are the world-edge,
      Pillar for the sky-arch.

      The world heaved—
      We are next to the sky.
      Over us, sea-hawks shout,
      Gulls sweep past.
      The terrible breakers are silent.

      Shall I hurl myself from here.
      Shall I leap and be nearer you?
      Shall I drop, beloved, beloved.

      Over me the wind swirls.
      I have stood on your portal
      And I know—
      You are further than this,
      Still further on another cliff.

In their passion for clearness, for the exact word, Imagists often use
certain words which sound ugly. In this poem of fourteen stanzas, the
word “lurch” occurs three times. It is not a pretty word, it does not
suggest a graceful action, yet apparently no other will do.

John Gould Fletcher is, first of all, pictorial. His conception of
Imagism differs slightly, it would seem, from his confreres. His
imagination is so strong he sees significance in every changing image of
this changing world. His rhythm is so vague that sometimes it is hardly
discoverable. His poetry could be printed about as well in block as in
line, as doubtless he would admit. He loves color—revels, glories, riots
in color; and he has a way of seeing resemblances to dragons and
serpents and other ungodly things in the simplest of natural
phenomena—trees or clouds or rain or even sunrise. His vocabulary is
astonishing. He plunges into a sea of words and plays with them, tossing
them up like jewels to sparkle in the sun, or burying them in pits to
see if they will still shine. He loves words, caresses them with a
lover’s touch, kisses them for luck, and then hurls them together in
such an incredible combination that the critics blink. A serious workman
withal, with much to say seething in his mind and a determination to say
it in his own way. There is perhaps no line in the six poems in this
Anthology equal to the much-quoted “Vermillion pavilion against a jade
balustrade.” _The Mexican Quarter_ is a poem of forty-two lines wherein
is depicted and symbolized the very spirit of Mexican life and love. It
ends with an unexpected little lyric. One can almost hear the twang of
the guitar. Here is Fletcher’s picture of _An Unquiet Street_:

      By day and night this street is not still:
      Omnibuses with red tail-lamps,
      Taxicabs with shiny eyes,
      Rumble, shunning its ugliness.
      It is corrugated with wheel-ruts,
      It is dented and pockmarked with traffic,
      If has no time for sleep.
      It heaves its old scarred countenance
      Skyward between the buildings
      And never says a word.

      On rainy nights
      It dully gleams
      Like the cold tarnished scales of a snake:
      And over it hang arc-lamps,
      Blue-white death-lilies on black stems.

I think only a poet’s eye in a fine frenzy rolling could see in our
municipal arc lamps “blue-white death-lilies on black stems,” but I am
going to look more carefully after this.

F. S. Flint has given us more beauty in his earlier work, notably in
_London My Beautiful_ and _The Swan_, than is to be found here, save
perhaps in _Chalfont Saint Giles_, which has simplicity and dignified
stateliness. It is a picture of village folk gravely filing into church,
past ivy and lilac, as the bell rings. The sadness of England in
war-time is in the picture. Here are two stanzas:

      Walk quietly
      along the mossy paths;
      the stones of the humble dead
      are hidden behind the blue mantle
      of their forget-me-nots;
      and before one grave so hidden
      a widow kneels, with head bowed,
      and the crape falling
      over her shoulders.

      The bells for evening church are ringing,
      and the people come gravely
      and with red, sun-burnt faces
      through the gates in the wall.

D. H. Lawrence contributes what may be considered, except for
_Patterns_, the most notable poem in the book, _Erinnyes_, although
again why it should be called Imagism is a mystery. It is certainly,
however, a poem, and a profound and beautiful one. In its form and its
long, slow, melancholy rhythm it suggests Aldington’s _Choricos_, and
the theme is the same—Death. Here are five stanzas:

      There are so many dead,
      Many have died unconsenting,
      Theirs ghosts are angry, unappeased.

      They come back, over the white sea, in the mist,
      Invisible, trooping home, the unassuaged ghosts
      Endlessly returning on the uneasy sea.

      What do they want, the ghosts, what is it
      They demand as they stand in menace over against us?
      How shall we now appease whom we have raised up?

      Must we open the doors, and admit them, receive them home,
      And in the silence, reverently, welcome them,
      And give them place and honour and service meet?

      For one year’s space, attend on our angry dead,
      Soothe them with service and honour, and silence meet,
      Strengthen, prepare them for the journey hence,
      Then lead them to the gates of the unknown,
      And bid farewell, oh stately travellers,
      And wait till they are lost upon our sight.

There is another poem of Lawrence’s called _Perfidy_ that gives an
elusive sense of horror and calamity. This effect lies partially in the
five-line stanza formation with the first, third, and fourth lines
rhyming. There is no particular reason for calling this poem Imagism
either; but we have agreed by now, I trust, that is not our first
consideration. No less a person than Miss Lowell herself gives us
justification in this viewpoint, for in a review of the poems of
Aldington and Flint in the June _Poetry Review_ she says, “Let us take
these little volumes as poetry pure and simple, forgetting schools and
creeds.”

There are thirty-two poems in all in the book. One person will like this
one best, another that. Suffice that the book is a valuable contribution
to contemporary literature.

----------

   [1] _Some Imagist Poets, 1916: An Annual Anthology. Boston:
   Houghton Mifflin._




                          Three Imagist Poets


                          JOHN GOULD FLETCHER

                    (_Continued from the May issue_)


                                  III

To pass from the poetry of Mr. Aldington to the poetry of H. D. is to
pass into another world. For H. D. not only is a modern poet, she is in
the best sense of the word a primitive poet. She deals with Greek themes
in the same way as the Greeks of the seventh century B. C. might have
dealt with them. She is not like Mr. Aldington, a sceptic enamoured of
their lost beauty. In a sense she is indifferent to beauty. Something
speaks to her in every rock, wave, or pine tree of those sunlit
landscapes in which she seems to live. For her the decadence of
antiquity, the Middle Ages, the modern world seem never to have existed.
She is purely and frankly pagan.

How is it that so many people interested in Imagism seem never to have
grasped this essential distinction between her work and Mr. Aldington’s?
I must suppose it is because very few people have ever tried to analyze
and rank the Imagist poets on any other basis than that of form. But as
I have already pointed out, the form of the Imagists is, after all, a
matter of lesser importance than the spirit, with which they approach
that form. Aldington writes about life: H. D. is almost completely a
nature poet. Nature to her is not mere inanimate scenery or beautiful
decoration: it is packed with a life and significance which is beyond
our individual lives, and all her poems are in a sense acts of worship
towards it. Civilization for her does not exist, in our modern sense:
she seeks a civilization based only on the complete realization of
natural and physical law, without any ethical problems except the need
of merging and compounding all one’s desires and emotions in that law.
Her poetry is like a series of hymns of some forgotten and primitive
religion.

I like to think that this primitive quality in H. D.’s poetry comes from
the fact that she is an American. There can be no doubt that we are an
uncultivated, a barbarous people. Our ancestors, by migrating to an
immense and utterly undeveloped continent, without traditions, were
thrown face to face with nature and lost, in consequence, nearly all
feeling for their previous culture. If you take a child of civilized
parents and bring him up among savages, he will revert to savagery, and
in the same way our forefathers, as soon as they ceased to cling to the
Atlantic seaboard, changed, through contact with the immense wilderness
of the interior, not only mentally but physically. For example,
Washington was physically and mentally an English squire of his period:
Lincoln, about a hundred years later, was, in appearance and habits of
thought, like a man of another race. The Indian, although conquered,
gave to his conquerors the Indian way of thinking; or rather the
Indian’s surroundings—the endless forest—produced in the newcomers’
minds something of the same way of thinking as the Indian had before
their coming. What a pity it has been for art that we, as a nation, did
not admit without shame this return to nature! But instead, we were
ashamed of our barbarism, and we have striven and are still striving to
outdo Europe on its own grounds, with the result that so much of our art
seems merely transplanted, exotic, and false. We might have been the
Russians of the western hemisphere; instead of that we were almost the
provincial English. Instead of Fenimore Cooper and _The Song of
Hiawatha_, we might have given to the world a new national epic. But the
opportunity is now lost and whatever fragments of that epic may be
written will have to be very sophisticated and in a sense artificial
products.

To make an end of this long digression, I can truly say that I find
nothing transplanted in H. D.’s poetry. She has borrowed a few names of
gods from the early Greek, but that was because she found herself in
complete sympathy with this people, who, if we are to believe the modern
school of archaeology, were quite as barbarian themselves in the Homeric
period as the Red Indians, and who lived in the closest contact with
nature. Let us take an early example:


                           Hermes of the Ways

      The hard sand breaks,
      And the grains of it
      Are clear as wine.

      Far off over the leagues of it,
      The wind,
      Playing on the wide shore,
      Piles little ridges,
      And the great waves
      Break over it.

      But more than the many-foamed ways
      Of the sea,
      I know him
      Of the triple path-ways,
      Hermes,
      Who awaiteth.

      Dubious,
      Facing three ways,
      Welcoming wayfarers,
      He whom the sea-orchard
      Shelters from the west,
      From the east,
      Weathers sea-wind:
      Fronts the great dunes.

      Wind rushes
      Over the dunes,
      And the coarse salt-crusted grass
      Answers.

      Heu,
      It whips round my ankles!

This is only one-half of the poem, but it will serve to show this poet’s
method. Here Hermes is identified with the yellow barrier of sand dunes
which breaks the wind, and splits it into three directions, as it comes
in from the sea. The scenery and the feeling are not Greek. In fact, as
someone has pointed out, the whole poem might have been called “The
Coast of New Jersey.” But just as Coleridge found a way to give a
feeling of the emptiness of the sea by narrating the tale of a legendary
voyage on it, so H. D. has given us the eternal quality of the New
Jersey coast by identifying its savagery with Greek myth.

The difference between H. D.’s poetry and Aldington’s is therefore a
difference between an apparent complexity which cannot be analysed,
since it is really the simplest synthesis of primitive feeling, and a
studied simplicity which on analysis, reveals itself as something very
complex and modern. Aldington’s work when studied carefully, raises
questions about our life: H. D. goes deeper and offers us an eternal
answer. With the single exception of the _Choricos_, I know of no work
of H. D.’s which is not superior to Aldington’s in rhythm, as I know of
no work of Aldington’s which does not seem to have more unsolved
problems underlying its thought. Aldington is monodic, H. D. is
strophaic: Aldington writes on many themes: H. D. on two or three: H.
D.’s art is more perfect within its limits; Aldington’s is more
interesting because of its very human imperfection.

There is another short thing of H. D.’s which fulfils perfectly the
Greek dictum that a picture is a silent poem, a poem a speaking picture:

      Whirl up, sea—
      whirl your pointed pines,
      splash your great pines,
      over our rocks.
      Hurl your green over us,
      cover us with your pools of fir.

A chorus of Oreads might very well have sung that to the wind. Over and
over again, H. D. never tires of giving us the sea, the rocks, the
pines, the sunlight. There is such a hard brightness of sunlight in some
of the poems that it makes us fairly dizzy with its intensity:

      O wind,
      rend open the heat,
      cut apart the heat,
      rend it sideways.

      Fruit cannot drop
      through this thick air:
      fruit cannot fall into heat
      that presses up and blunts
      the points of pears
      and rounds the grapes.

      Cut the heat,
      plough through it,
      turning it on either side
      of your path.

These poems are like cries to unknown gods. Some are simply stark in
their dramatic magnificence:


                           The Wind Sleepers

      Whiter
      than the crust
      left by the tide,
      we are stung by the hurled sand
      and the broken shells.
      We no longer sleep,
      sleep in the wind,
      we awoke and fled
      through the Peiraeic gate.

      Tear,
      tear us an altar,
      tug at the cliff-boulders,
      pile them with the rough stones.
      We no longer
      sleep in the wind.
      Propitiate us.

      Chant in a wail
      that never halts;
      pace a circle and pay tribute
      with a song.

      When the roar of a dropped wave
      breaks into it,
      pour meted words
      of sea-hawks and gulls
      and sea-birds that cry
      discords.

Recently H. D. has been giving us longer and more complex
poems—condensed dramas of nature and life. Her style has become broader
and deeper, and her thought more weighty. I wish I could quote all of a
poem of this nature called _Sea-Gods_. I can only give a brief analysis
of it.

The entire poem is a sort of invocation and service of propitiation to
the powers of the sea. In its opening lines the poet cries out:

      They say there is no hope—
      sand—drift—rocks—rubble of the sea,
      the broken hulk of a ship,
      hung with shreds of rope,
      pallid under the cracked pitch.

      They say there is no hope
      to conjure you.

In short, the gods are merely broken wrecks of the past. The forces of
nature cannot help us, it is useless to cry out to them, for they are

      —cut, torn, mangled,
      torn by the stress and beat,
      no stronger than the strips of sand
      along your ragged beach.

But, says the poet, in a beautiful passage:

      But we bring violets,
      great masses, single, sweet:
      wood-violets, stream-violets,
      violets from a wet marsh,
      violets in clumps from the hills.

Every kind of violet is brought and strewn on the sea. For what reason?
Here is the answer:

      You will yet come,
      you will yet haunt men in ships—
      you will thunder along the cliff,
      break—retreat—get fresh strength—
      gather and pour weight upon the beach.

      You will bring myrrh-bark,
      and drift laurel wood from hot coasts;
      when you hurl, high—high—
      We will answer with a shout.

      For you will come,
      you will answer our taut hearts,
      you will break the lie of men’s thoughts,
      and shelter us for our trust.

Has the sea, then, in this poem been used in some way as a symbol of the
eternal drift, change and reflux of our life which we have tried to
conceal under theories of ethics, of progress, of immortality, of
civilization? Perhaps it has. And the violets—what, then, are they but
simply the recollections of our earlier sea-state, of our endless,
unconscious drift with the tides of life?

I do not propose here to examine H. D.’s mystic philosophy. That
philosophy cannot be disengaged from its context. But from a quite
recent poem of hers—a poem very beautiful and baffling, I may perhaps be
permitted to quote these few lines, wrenched from their context, without
comment:

      Sleepless nights,
      I remember the initiates,
      their gesture, their calm glance,
      I have heard how, in rapt thought,
      in vision they speak
      with another race
      More beautiful, more intense than this—

      I reason:
      another life holds what this lacks:
      a sea, unmoving, quiet,
      not forcing our strength
      to rise to it, beat on beat,
      a hill not set with black violets,
      but stones, stones, bare rocks,
      dwarf-trees, twisted, no beauty,
      to distract—to crowd
      madness upon madness.

      Only a still place,
      and perhaps some outer horror,
      some hideousness to stamp beauty—
      on our hearts.


                                   IV

The third poet whose work I have to examine, Mr. F. S. Flint, was
already an accomplished writer of rhymed vers libre before he joined the
Imagist movement. Mr. Flint’s early work is contained in a volume
entitled, _In the Net of the Stars_, a volume which is still worth
reading. _The Net of the Stars_ told a love-story in rather uncommon
fashion. The poet and his beloved were presented throughout the book,
against the background of the starry sky:

      Little knots in the net of light
      That is held by the infinite Dragon, Night.

This bringing into relation of a quite human love-story, with the
impassive and changeless order of the Universe, threw a flavour of
supreme irony over the whole book. The work is otherwise remarkable
technically. At the date when it was published, 1909, Mr. Flint already
revealed that he was an assiduous student of Verhaeren, De Regnier, and
other French vers-librists. Hence its importance as a document in the
Imagist movement.

But to come to Mr. Flint’s later work which has been assembled under the
title of _Cadences_. We find here a poet, first of all, of sentiment.
What, you say, an Imagist who deals with sentiment? My reply to that is,
that it is time people understood that an Imagist is free to deal with
whatever he chooses, so long as he is sincere and honest about it. Mr.
Flint’s sincerity is his finest point. He is in some sense the Paul
Verlaine of the Imagist movement. His work gives one the same delicacy
of nuance, the same fresh fragrance, the same direct simplicity, the
same brooding melancholy. He lacks the strain of coarseness which ruined
Verlaine; he has, in place of it, a refined nobility. He has not humour.
At times he has attempted irony, but I cannot think he has altogether
succeeded in it. He feels life too poignantly to ever mock at life.
There remains tenderness, wistful pathos, imaginative beauty.

On reading Mr. Flint one obtains a very distinct impression of Mr.
Flint’s personality. One pictures him as a shy, sensitive, lonely
dreamer filled with a desire to attain to the noblest and finest life,
but somehow kept back from it. Mr. Flint is one of the few poets I know
who have preserved intact today a spark of the old lyrical idealism. He
is, perhaps, though he may not realize it, even closer to Keats and
Shelley than to Verlaine—he might almost be called a modern Shelley. His
affiliation with these earlier and greater romantics is more marked
because it is an affiliation of spirit, not of form. Mr. Flint’s form
has always been his own, and by holding conscientiously to his own form,
he has come closer, to my way of thinking, to poets like Keats and
Shelley than the innumerable tribe of imitators who have rashly taken
the form for the substance.

Here is an early example of Mr. Flint’s work:

      London, my beautiful,
      it is not the sunset,
      nor the pale green sky
      shimmering through the curtain
      of the silver birch,
      nor the quietness;
      it is not the hopping
      of the little birds
      upon the lawn,
      nor the darkness
      stealing over all things
      that moves me.

      But as the moon creeps slowly
      over the treetops
      among the stars;
      I think of her,
      and the glow her passing
      sheds on men.

      London, my beautiful,
      I will climb
      into the branches
      to the moonlit treetops
      that my blood may be cooled
      by the wind.

And here is another, equally beautiful:

      Under the lily shadow,
      and the gold,
      and the blue, and the mauve,
      that the whin and the lilac
      pour down upon the water,
      the fishes quiver.

      Over the green cold leaves,
      and the rippled silver,
      and the tarnished copper
      of its neck and beak,
      toward the deep black water,
      beneath the arches,
      the swan floats slowly.

      Into the dark of the arch the swan floats,
      and the black depths of my sorrow
      bears a white rose of flame.

If Mr. Flint had written nothing else but these two poems he would be
immortal for their sake, in spite of his disregard—shared by H. D.—of
the convenient device which begins each line of a poem with a capital
letter, and of the laws of punctuation. They weave a perfect hypnotic
spell in my mind, and they fulfill completely a recent definition of Mr.
E. A. Robinson, that poetry is a language which expresses through an
emotional reaction something which cannot be said in ordinary speech.

Mr. Flint has given us other poems not less beautiful, but with a strain
of greater pathos:

      Tired faces,
      eyes that have never seen the world,
      bodies that have never lived in air,
      lips that have never minted speech;
      they are the clipped and garbled
      blocking the highway.
      They swarm and eddy
      between the banks of glowing shops
      towards the red meat,
      the potherbs,
      the cheapjacks,
      or surge in
      before the swift rush of the charging teams;
      pitiful, ugly, mean,
      encumbering.

      Immortal?
      In a wood
      watching the shadow of a bird,
      leap from frond to frond of bracken,
      I am immortal,
      perhaps.
      But these?
      Their souls are naphtha lamps,
      guttering in an odour of carious teeth,
      and I die with them.

Perhaps the last poem in Mr. Flint’s book will give the most complete
exposition of his art and vision:


                                The Star

      Bright Star of Life,
      Who shattered creeds at Bethlehem,
      And saw
      In the irradiance of your vision shining,
      Children and maidens, youths and men and women,
      Dancing barefoot among the grasses, singing,
      Dancing,
      Over the waving flowery meadows;
      So calmly watched the universe and men,
      And yet
      So fiery was the heart behind the light;

      The creeds have been re-made by men
      Who followed as you walked abroad,
      And gathered up their shattered shards;
      Then with a wax of sticky zeal,
      Each little piece unto its fellow joined;
      But over the meadows comes the wind
      Remembering your voice:

      _O my love,_
      _O my golden-haired, my golden-hearted,_
      _I will sing this song to you of Him,_
      _This golden afternoon._
      _This song of you;_
      _For where love is, is He,_
      _Whose name has echoed in the halls of Time,_
      _Who caught the wise eternal music, ay,_
      _And passed it on—_
      _For men to sing it since_
      _In false and shifting keys—_
      _Who hears it now?_

      But the hearts of those who have heard it rightly,
      Grew great;
      And behind the walls and barriers of the world,
      Their voices have gone up in sweetness
      Unheeded,
      Yet imminent in the wings and flight of change;
      Comes there a time when men shall shout it,
      And say to Life:
      You have the strength of the seas,
      And the glory of the vine;
      You shall have the wisdom of the hills,
      The daring of the eagle’s wings,
      The yearning of the swallow’s quest.
      And, in the mighty organ of the world,
      Great men shall be as pipes and nations stops
      To harmonize your Song.

      _O my love,_
      _Like a cornfield in summer_
      _Is your body to me;_
      _Golden and bending with the wind,_
      _And on the tallest ear a bird is piping_
      _The lonely song._
      _And scarlet poppies thread the golden ways._
      _Out of the purple haze of the sea behind it_
      _Appears a white ship sailing,_
      _And its passengers are harvesters._
      _But who dares sing of love?_

      The jackals howl; the vultures gorge dead flesh.

In despite of the last line, which is undoubtedly true, and, under the
present circumstances, certainly necessary to the context of all that
precedes it, yet I feel I cannot share Mr. Flint’s despair of this
world. For as long as there is any poet who can have such visions as
this is, in such a world as ours, the earth cannot be altogether given
over to crime and slaughter. Which one of the Imagists could have given
us with so direct and poignant sincerity—scorning all artifice—such a
vision of beauty? Or, for that matter, which one of the poets of today?




                           The Reader Critic


                            What Is Anarchy?

_Alan Adair, London_:

In the March number of THE LITTLE REVIEW, Miss Alice Groff criticises
Anarchy. She criticises it badly and unfairly. She writes as though she
did not understand what anarchy is. Have you room in your paper for me
to tell her?

Anarchy is the name given to those periods in the life of a people
during which the principle of domination is held in abeyance and men are
no longer accountable to any magistracy. It is properly a political
word. It has no philosophical significance. All it means is absence of
material government. It is in that sense that Milton uses it and Swift
uses it. It is in that sense that writers of history books employ it. It
is a term, and the only correct term, for a certain condition of
society. That condition has occurred in the past and will doubtless
occur in the future. It is the result of an equality of strength among
the different elements, or “social-egos” that make up a community. There
is Anarchy only so long as these forces remain equal. Once they cease to
be equal, so soon as one begins to tend towards dominance, so soon does
the Anarchy end. According to the “social-ego” that has triumphed, the
changed commonwealth becomes an oligarchy or a kingdom; a military
republic, an ochlocracy or a federation of communes. But until then,
while there is still absence of supreme coercive power, while there is
still _no dominant “social-ego,”_ so long is the community correctly
termed an Anarchy.

Between this, the Anarchy of fact and of history, and the Anarchy of
theory and modern revolutionists, there is no substantial difference.
The anarchist, in any age, is simply and without qualification, a man
who desires an end put to the political power under which he lives. The
reason _why_ he desires such a thing does not matter. He may think
government to be eternally an evil or only presently an evil. He may be
egoist or communist. What makes him an anarchist is that he hates the
social order around him and would precipitate its destruction by
paralyzing the centers of its administrative and legislative authority.

The theoretical case against government has little part in the mind of
the modern anarchist. Miss Groff altogether overestimates the importance
that he attaches to it. The war against authority _as authority_ is
past. We are beyond that kind of mysticism. Scepticism is a big
ingredient of Anarchy and the anarchist knows only too well that we know
too little of psychology and too little of philosophy to judge the worth
of abstractions like justice or liberty or the principle of domination.
We can only fix temporary, conditional values to such things. Actual,
modern authority is the only sphinx that troubles the contemporary
anarchist. He has no desire to control the destinies of his people and,
as anarchist, he has no theories about the future form of its political
institutions. His business is solely with present facts. His task is
simply destruction. It may be that he does not start from a “basis of
reason.” He has seen and thought too much to trouble greatly about
reason. He knows too many books to have much optimism. He sees sprawled
across the earth a tragic and incoherent civilization and he sees the
most virile of the races of man lose under its influence the spontaneity
of their actions and the region of their instincts. That, possibly more
than the desire to “complete a circuit of reason,” is at the root of his
attitude to society. The question of the moral significance of archist
or an-archist is beyond the answering of Miss Groff or any one else. The
question of whether it is well to endure the present order; to be
dwarfed and poisoned by its ideals; to be devoted by its economy to
contemptible pursuits; to be forced to conjunction with base influences
by every circumstance that past power has created for the control of
present humanity; that is at least an answerable question. Of the value
of the anarchist answer there may be many opinions, but that it is an
intelligible answer is not to be denied. It is simple and coherent.
Society is sick of its many counsellors and rulers. Its sources of
spiritual vitality are dried up. It is full of confusion; bereft of
consistent purpose; continuing only in mechanical existence. To
precipitate its decay is the one wise action possible to mankind. All
things are grown fatigued; without simplicity of soul or rigour of
desire. Religions, institutions and codes of law are no longer animated;
solely the dead weight of the past holds them in position. Of what use
to plan, meditate or invent, to conquer elements or to evoke from the
earth new, fantastic and wonder-working metals, when that which has
custody of all such things, that which alone can give continuity to the
works and achievements of man our mother civilization itself is in
dissolution?

To the mind of the anarchist, there are but two courses open to
humanity. First: there may be a continuance of the present conditions: a
society stratified as now, stupidified as now, completely organized, of
antique institutions, growing perpetually enfeebled in spirit, the
current of its vitality becoming attenuated until lost in the morass of
an enormous racial degeneracy. Or else, secondly, the mechanism of
civilization may break and a period of administrative and moral chaos
not easily distinguishable from barbarism supervene upon dilatory
decadence. It is this second course that commends itself to the
anarchist. Only in a partial cessation of its continuity, only in a
barbaric forgetfulness of its eternal problems and speculations can an
exhausted humanity come once more to a zest for existence and the will
to achievement.

And an Anarchy is commonly an epoch of such confusion and recovery.


                        Impressions of the Loop

_A Boy Reader, Chicago_:

Is the following good enough for you to print?

   As I walk through the streets of the Loop,
   Big, fat, double-chinned women fan by;
   They reek of Melba perfume:
   They might have used some other kind,
   But they like Melba: fat women, I mean.
   Then there are whining old ladies;
   They look disdainfully at the gay styles,
   Whining, because they are disgusted—
   (Envious disgust).
   They are old, you know, and can’t do such things.
   And drunken men tumble from the corner saloons;
   I envy them, for they are very happy.
   Miserable, begging men and women sit in comfort
   On every corner.
   Some have _an_ arm, some _a_ leg,
   But they had _another_ once.
   Why don’t the rich people take care of them?
   They might lose their arms and legs!
   Big limousines glide by;
   Painted blonde ladies sit on soft cushions.
   They must sit there!
   What would the jewelry stores do without them!
   Diamonds glitter on their perfumed hands;
   They cannot smile, for the paint would crack
   And fall from their faces. Besides, they are select.
   Ragamuffins weave in and out.
   They hop cars, scream, and envy the blossoming windows
   Of cheap Delicatessens.
   Flip stenographers flit by;
   Their ankles are gay with many-colored stilty shoes,
   But their stockings are full of holes and Jacob’s ladders
   Under it all.
   Terrible odors fill the air:
   Fish, gasoline, booze, sachet-powder (lots of Melba),
   Gas, cheap roses, and peanuts; coffee, smoke,
   And other things.
   Dirty men, clean men, dudes, street mashers,
   Cheap Musicians and Artists....
   This is life!


                  Statement of Ownership, Management,
               Circulation, Etc., Required by the Act of
                      Congress of August 24, 1912

            Of THE LITTLE REVIEW, published monthly at
            Chicago, Ill., for April 1st, 1916.

            State of Illinois, County of Cook—ss:

            Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State
            and county aforesaid, personally appeared
            Margaret C. Anderson, who, having been duly
            sworn according to law, deposes and says that
            she is the Editor of THE LITTLE REVIEW, and
            that the following is, to the best of her
            knowledge and belief, a true statement of the
            ownership, management (and if a daily paper,
            the circulation), etc., of the aforesaid
            publication for the date shown in the above
            caption, required by the Act of August 24,
            1912, embodied in section 443, Postal Laws and
            Regulations, printed on the reverse of this
            form, to wit:

            1. That the names and addresses of the
            publisher, editor, managing editor, and
            business managers are:

            Publisher, Margaret C. Anderson, 834 Fine Arts
            Building; Editor, Margaret C. Anderson, 834
            Fine Arts Building; Managing editor, Margaret
            C. Anderson, 834 Fine Arts Building; Business
            manager, Margaret C. Anderson, 834 Fine Arts
            Building.

            2. That the owners are: (Give names and
            addresses of individual owners, or, if a
            corporation, give its name and the names and
            addresses of stockholders owning or holding 1
            per cent or more of the total amount of stock.)

            Margaret C. Anderson, 834 Fine Arts Building.

            3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and
            other security holders owning or holding 1 per
            cent or more of total amount of bonds,
            mortgages, or other securities are: (If there
            are none, so state.) None.

            4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving
            the names of the owners, stockholders, and
            security holders, if any, contain not only the
            list of stockholders and security holders as
            they appear upon the books of the company but
            also, in cases where the stockholders or
            security holder appears upon the books of the
            company as trustee or in any other fiduciary
            relation, the name of the person or corporation
            for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also
            that the said two paragraphs contain statements
            embracing affiant’s full knowledge and belief
            as to the circumstances and conditions under
            which stockholders and security holders who do
            not appear upon the books of the company as
            trustee, hold stock and securities in a
            capacity other than that of a bona fide owner;
            and this affiant has no reason to believe that
            any other person, association, or corporation
            has any interest direct or indirect in the said
            stock, bonds, or other securities than as so
            stated by him.

                                     MARGARET C. ANDERSON.

            Sworn to and subscribed before me this 31st day
            of March, 1916.

            (SEAL)

                           MITCHELL DAWSON, Notary Public.
                (My commission expires December 20, 1917.)




                       A Vers Libre Prize Contest


Through the generosity of a friend, THE LITTLE REVIEW is enabled to
offer an unusual prize for poetry—possibly the first prize extended to
free verse. The giver is “interested in all experiments, and has
followed the poetry published in THE LITTLE REVIEW with keen
appreciation and a growing admiration for the poetic form known as _vers
libre_.”

The conditions are as follows:

Contributions must be received by August 15th.

They must not be longer than twenty-five lines.

They must be sent anonymously with stamps for return.

The name and address of the author must be fixed to the manuscript in a
sealed envelope.

It should be borne in mind that free verse is wanted—verse having beauty
of rhythm, not merely prose separated into lines.

There will be three judges: William Carlos Williams, Zoë Aikens and
Helen Hoyt.

There will be two prizes of $25 each. They are offered not as a first
and second prize, but for “the two best short poems in free verse form.”

As there will probably be a large number of poems to read, we suggest
that contributors adhere closely to the conditions of the contest.




                         THE NEW POETRY SERIES

     A successful attempt to give the best of contemporary verse a
                  wide reading in its own generation.

                         NEW VOLUMES NOW READY

                        SOME IMAGIST POETS, 1916

   A new collection of the work of this interesting group of
   poets—Richard Aldington, “H. D.”, John Gould Fletcher, F. S.
   Flint, D. H. Lawrence, and Amy Lowell—showing increased scope and
   power and confirming their important position in modern poetry.
   The volume includes Miss Lowell’s “Patterns” and “Spring Day,”
   and Mr. Fletcher’s Arizona poems.

                          GOBLINS AND PAGODAS
                         By JOHN GOULD FLETCHER

   This volume includes “Ghosts of an Old House” and ten
   “Symphonies” interpreting in terms of color the inner life of a
   poet. In originality of conception, in sheer tonal beauty, and in
   the subtlety with which moods are evoked, these poems mark a
   distinct advance in the development of the art of poetry.

                                 ROADS
                         By GRACE FALLOW NORTON

   The author of “The Little Gray Songs from St. Joseph’s” writes in
   the old metres but with all the artistic vitality of the newer
   school of poets. The poems of this volume represent the best work
   she has yet done.

                            TURNS AND MOVIES
                            By CONRAD AIKEN

   “Most remarkable of all recent free verse.”—Reedy’s St. Louis
   Mirror.

                           A SONG OF THE GUNS
                           By GILBERT FRANKAU

   Wonderfully vivid pictures of modern war written to the roar of
   guns on the western front by a son of Frank Danby, the novelist.
   These are the war poems the world has been waiting for.

                                 IDOLS
                       By WALTER CONRAD ARENSBERG

   Contains many interesting experiments in new metres and
   reflective verse of much beauty as well as novel and effective
   renderings of Mallarmé’s “Afternoon of a Faun,” and of Dante’s
   Fifth Canto.

      Each 75 cents Net, except “A Song of the Guns,” which is 50
                               cents Net.

                          HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO.
                At all Bookstores 4 Park Street, Boston




                          READ THE MISCELLANY

                      An Illustrated QUARTERLY for
                   Connoisseurs of the Book-Beautiful

                Occasional Book Reviews and Articles on
                       Prints, Etchings and Fine
                               Engraving

                        THE OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF
                     THE AMERICAN BOOKPLATE SOCIETY

                      $1.00 a Year 25 Cents a Copy

                                Address
                         EDITOR, THE MISCELLANY
                   1010 Euclid Avenue Cleveland, Ohio


        Are you really opposed to the war and are you anxious to
             do anti-military propaganda? Then help spread


                        ANTI-MILITARY LITERATURE

             Preparedness, the Road to Universal Slaughter
               By Emma Goldman, 5c each, $2.50 a hundred

                    Patriotism, a Menace to Liberty
               By Emma Goldman, 5c each, $2.50 a hundred

                           War and Capitalism
                      By Peter Kropotkin, 5c each

                              The Last War
                       By George Barrett, 5c each

            For sale by MOTHER EARTH PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION
                  20 EAST 125th STREET, NEW YORK CITY

                        “Et j’ai voulu la paix”




                                 POÈMES

         Par ANDRÉ SPIRE Author of “Versets,” “Vers les Routes
                             Absurdes,” &c.

   A little book of unpublished poems written just before and during
   the war. M. Spire has been in Nancy, within a few kilometres of
   the firing-line, since August, 1914.

   THE EGOIST, in publishing these poems by as well known an author
   as M. Spire, hopes to reach that fairly numerous public in
   England which reads French, and hopes also to follow up this book
   with other small collections of new French poetry by the younger
   poets.

                      Copies may be obtained from
      THE EGOIST, or from RICHARD ALDINGTON, 7 Christchurch Place,
                             Hampstead, N. W.

                        Price 6d net. Postage 1d

                     EDITION LIMITED TO 750 COPIES

       A List of Interesting Papers to Appear in Early Issues of


                         THE QUARTERLY NOTEBOOK

                           Homage to Watteau*
                       _By W. G. Blaikie-Murdoch_

                    Seventeenth Century Type-Making*
                            _By Dard Hunter_

                   The Centenary of Charlotte Brontë
                          _By E. Basil Lupton_

                 Synge and Borrow: A Contrast in Method
                        _By Miriam Allen deFord_

                     Dickens as a Student of Scott
                          _By E. Basil Lupton_

                                Ivories
                            _By N. Tourneur_

   *Illustrated




                           The Little Review


                     Literature, Drama, Music, Art

                      MARGARET C. ANDERSON, Editor

       The monthly that has been called “the most unique journal
                             in existence.”

   THE LITTLE REVIEW is a magazine that believes in Life for Art’s
   sake, in the Individual rather than in Incomplete People, in an
   Age of Imagination rather than of Reasonableness; a magazine
   interested in Past, Present, and Future, but particularly in the
   New Hellenism; a magazine written for Intelligent People who can
   Feel, whose philosophy is Applied Anarchism, whose policy is a
   Will to Splendour of Life, and whose function is—to express
   itself.

       One Year, U.S.A., $1.50; Canada, $1.65; Great Britain, 7/-




                           The Little Review




                               THE FLAME

                       A JOURNAL FOR THE NEW AGE

               Irwin Granich and Van K. Allison, Editors.
                   3 Bellingham Place, Boston, Mass.

   “The Flame” is to be a monthly journal of revolution, soon to
   take life. It is to burn against oppression and authority
   everywhere, and is to be as pure and merciless as the flower of
   light after which it is named.

   We want you to help us make “The Flame.” It is not to be one of
   those vehicles for the delivery of the vast thoughts of an
   unrecognized “genius,” but a little forum where every
   revolutionist of high heart and purpose can speak. We can pay
   nothing, of course. Cartoons, poems, stories, sketches, tracts,
   philosophies, news reports—all will be welcomed.

   No creed or philosophy will be barred from our columns if only
   its devotee writes in a beautiful and furious and yes-saying
   gesture. The editorials will be flavored by the anarchy of the
   publishers.


                               INVITATION
                                   TO
                               MEMBERSHIP

                         SOCIETY OF MODERN ART

   Every copy of M. A. C. (Modern Art Collector) is spreading the
   new form of art throughout America, is adding the law of
   recognition to these hard-working, self-sacrificing, unselfish
   artists.

   Support of the Collector is a direct and potent method of
   manifesting your interest in Modern Art and of aiding its advance
   in the betterment of the Modern Artist.

   A fee of eighteen dollars will be charged by the publishers of
   the Modern Art Collector to those desiring to lend support to the
   Modern Art Movement. The payment of the fee will be acknowledged
   by an engraved certificate signed by the Society’s officers and
   will entitle the contributor to copies of M. A. C., containing
   collections of Modern Artists’ work for the period of two years.

   Those who have previously subscribed to M. A. C. may procure the
   same advantages by paying the difference between the subscription
   rate and the membership fee.




                                  EMMA
                                GOLDMAN

                          THE NOTED ANARCHIST


                  Will Lecture in San Francisco, Cal.,
                    at Fillmore Street Averill Hall

                1861 Fillmore St., Bet. Sutter and Bush

      SUNDAY, JULY 16th, 8 P. M.
      “Anarchism and Human Nature—Do they harmonize?”

      TUESDAY, JULY 18th, 8 P. M.
      “The Family—Its Enslaving Effect upon Parents and Children”

      WEDNESDAY, JULY 19th, 8 P. M.
      “Art For Life”

      THURSDAY, JULY 20th, 8 P. M.
      “Preparedness, The Road to Universal Slaughter”

      FRIDAY, JULY 21st, 8 P. M.
      “Friedrich Nietzsche and the German Kaiser”

      SATURDAY, JULY 22nd, 8 P. M.
      “The Educational and Sexual Mutilation of the Child”
      (The Gary System Discussed)

      SUNDAY, JULY 23rd, 8 P. M.
      “The Philosophy of Atheism”
      (The Lecture delivered before the Congress of Religious Philosophies
         held at San Francisco during the Exposition)

               Questions and Discussions at all Lectures

                           Admission 25 Cents




                          Transcriber’s Notes


Advertisements were collected at the end of the text.

The table of contents on the title page was adjusted in order to reflect
correctly the headings in this issue of THE LITTLE REVIEW.

The original spelling was mostly preserved. A few obvious typographical
errors were silently corrected. All other changes are shown here
(before/after):

   [p. 3]:
   ... when the First Consul sent home the news of the victory of
       Merengo?” ...
   ... when the First Consul sent home the news of the victory of
       Marengo?” ...

   [p. 25]:
   ... in landlady’s pink, a Jessicca (a spirited Cockney girl) in
       Turkish costume, ...
   ... in landlady’s pink, a Jessica (a spirited Cockney girl) in
       Turkish costume, ...

   [p. 26]:
   ... if similar technique, should chose to band themselves
       together ...
   ... if similar technique, should choose to band themselves
       together ...

   [p. 41]:
   ... And, in the mightly organ of the world, ...
   ... And, in the mighty organ of the world, ...

   [p. 43]:
   ... now, stupified as now, completely organized, of antique
       institutions, growing perpetually ...
   ... now, stupidified as now, completely organized, of antique
       institutions, growing perpetually ...






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE REVIEW, JUNE-JULY 1916 (VOL. 3, NO. 4) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


