The Project Gutenberg eBook of Betty Crocker's Frosting Secrets
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Betty Crocker's Frosting Secrets

Author: Betty Crocker

Release date: May 21, 2020 [eBook #62188]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETTY CROCKER'S FROSTING SECRETS ***

                           _Betty Crocker’s_
                            FROSTING SECRETS


  • _Fancy cake decorating_
  • _New cake-trimming short cuts_
  • _Fabulous party cake ideas_




    The Frosting makes the cake and Betty Crocker Frosting Mix makes
                      perfect frosting every time




                                CONTENTS


  Quick frosting tricks                                                4
  Teaspoon scallops • Spatula spirals • Crisscross • Swirly squares
          • Plaid Cake • Christmas Ball Frosting • Hobnail Fudge
          Frosting • Glossy Web
  Teaspoon tricks with frosting mix                                    6
  Bunny • Dahlia • Easy Flowers
  Cherry Blossom Cake                                                  7
  Easy-does-it decorating                                              8
  Decorator icing with Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix
  Cross-stitch Cake                                                   10
  Party-pretty Cakes                                                  12
  Forget-me-not Cake • Trellis Cake • Daisy Cake • Gift Wrapped Cake
  Birthday Cakes                                                      14
  Birthday Bouquets • Happy Birthday Cake • Flower Garden Cake •
          Circus Cake
  Doll Cake                                                           16
  Party Petit Fours
  Holiday Cakes                                                       18
  Sugarplum Tree • Clown Cake • Easter Bonnet Cake • Valentine Cake
  Wedding Cake                                                        20
  Quick Homemade Candies                                              22
  Frozen Desserts, Specialty Frostings                                23

            © 1958 General Mills, Inc.    Printed in U.S.A.

    [Illustration: Betty Crocker]

Welcome! Come join us in the fun of frosting glamorous decorated cakes!
It’s surprising how easy it is, once you get the knack of it. Our Fluffy
White Frosting Mix is a big help—it makes a decorator icing that’s
always smooth and easy-flowing.

Your very first cake will be pretty enough to be proud of! And if it
isn’t absolutely perfect, please don’t be discouraged—the practice
you’ve had will make your next cake much, much easier. To start, try the
quick-as-a-wink tricks that don’t need a decorator set. And try the
candies and desserts from our frosting mixes—easy shortcuts to delicious
treats!
                                                         {Betty Crocker}

_P. S._ Before you decorate, you have to _frost_ your cake! These tips
will help!

    [Illustration: After cooling cake thoroughly on rack, brush all the
    loose crumbs away with your fingers before frosting the cake.]

    [Illustration: Set one layer upside down on plate; frost top with
    about ⅓ of frosting. Set other layer on top, right-side-up.]

    [Illustration: Frost SIDES first, then top. Make attractive swirls
    with spatula, or leave smooth for added designs.]

Choose one of our five frosting mixes to be sure of perfect
frosting—always creamy-smooth and easy-spreading!




                     Quick and easy Frosting tricks
                     _no special equipment needed!_


With a fork, spoon, spatula, or a piece of string, you can make your
frosting “fancy”  ... as the simple ideas on these pages show. And with
our Betty Crocker Frosting Mixes, you can be sure of perfect
frosting—always just right to handle easily.

Use Betty Crocker Chocolate Fudge, Chocolate Malt, or Peanut Creme
Frosting Mix for these tricks:

    [Illustration: Scallops—With teaspoon inverted, press tip into
    frosted cake. Repeat in rows across cake for all over design.]

    [Illustration: Spiral—Hold spatula at center of frosted cake.
    Gradually draw spatula toward you, while turning cake.]

    [Illustration: Crisscross—Draw tines of fork across cake. Repeat at
    right angles to first markings. Place colorful candies in squares.]

    [Illustration: Swirly squares—Draw lines through frosting with
    knife. Repeat at right angles, drawing lines in opposite ways.]




                The Frosting on the cake shows you care

    [Illustration: Plaid Cake—Use Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting
    Mix. Frost cake. Dip string in food coloring; stretching it taut,
    press into frosting. Repeat. Use new string for each color. Make up
    your own plaid design.]

    [Illustration: Christmas Balls—Use Betty Crocker Malt Frosting Mix.
    Frost cake. Save ¼ cup frosting. Cut tiny corner off envelope.
    Squeeze frosting through envelope to trim vari-colored flat mints.
    Press onto cake.]

    [Illustration: Hobnail Fudge Frosting—Use Betty Crocker Chocolate
    Fudge Frosting Mix. Frost top of cake thickly. Press down with bowl
    of teaspoon, swirl slightly; draw up sharply. Repeat for an all over
    hobnail design.]

    [Illustration: Glossy Web—Use Betty Crocker Peanut Creme Frosting
    Mix. Frost cake. Melt 1 sq. unsweetened chocolate (1 oz.). Dip knife
    in chocolate. Mark circles on top of cake. Draw knife out from
    center for web.]




                   _For glamor in a hurry, try these_
                            Teaspoon Tricks
                           with Frosting Mix!


_Quick Tricks_ with Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix.

    [Illustration: Bunny: Tint ½ cup frosting pink. Fill teaspoon with
    frosting; with second spoon, ease off mounds of frosting for body
    and head of bunny. Dabs of white frosting make “cottontail” and
    ears. Add cinnamon candy eyes and coconut whiskers.]

    [Illustration: Dahlia: Tint 1 cup frosting yellow. Drop 10 mounds of
    frosting around center of cake. Draw out with spoon to make petal
    shapes. Add 10 smaller mounds for second layer of petals, pulling
    tips up with spoon. Shape center; decorate with silver dragées.]

Easy Flowers with Decorator Icing (p. 9)—or use Betty Crocker Chocolate
Fudge, Chocolate Malt, or Peanut Creme Frosting Mix. (½ cup makes 5 or 6
flowers.)

    [Illustration: Put a gumdrop on a toothpick. Fill tip end of
    teaspoon with icing, smooth it off along edge of cup.]

    [Illustration: Draw spoon gently down over gumdrop; off comes one
    petal. Continue around the gumdrop in same way.]

    [Illustration: Add a second row of petals. Place finished flower on
    cake. Remove toothpick. Repeat for flowers desired.]




                A cake’s crowning glory is its Frosting




                          Cherry Blossom Cake


    [Illustration: Cherry Blossom Cake]

    [Illustration: Cherry Blossom Cake: Use Betty Crocker Cherry Fluff
    Frosting Mix. Frost cake. Save ½ cup frosting; tint deeper pink with
    red food coloring. Half-fill teaspoon; with second teaspoon, ease
    each petal onto cake. Sprinkle centers with yellow sugar.]




                          Your Decorating Set


Many different decorating tips are available—but these basic 5 will make
all the glamor cakes shown in this book. If you have a set, select these
tips by their numbers. Or you can get this basic set for $1.00 ... see
details on p. 23.

    [Illustration: #4 writing tip ... used for writing, lattice designs,
    and other delicate patterns.]

    [Illustration: #28 star tip ... used for smaller borders, simple
    flowers, and fancy letters.]

    [Illustration: #104 petal tip ... makes petals for roses and other
    flowers, also flat ribbons and borders.]

    [Illustration: #68 leaf tip ... makes leaves, long petals, delicate
    lace borders, and edgings.]

    [Illustration: #96 flower tip ... makes many flowers like rosettes
    by a simple twist of the cone.]




                Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix
              makes a wonderful can’t-fail Decorator Icing

No need to make up a special separate batch of icing to decorate your
cake! One package makes plenty to frost your cake and decorate it, too:




To 1 cup prepared Fluffy White Frosting...

Blend in 1 to 1½ cups _sifted_ confectioners’ sugar (add a little at a
      time until frosting is stiff enough to hold its shape)....

Blend in 1 tbsp. soft butter and a dash of salt.

Note: Increase sugar and butter when using more than 1 cup frosting.

_Is it thick enough? Is it thin enough?_ Try a little with the tip you
plan to use. If too thin, blend in a little more confectioners’ sugar.
If too thick, blend in a drop or two of water.


HOW TO USE YOUR CONE

    [Illustration: 1 Fit tip tightly into cone with one finger. Fill
    about half full. Fold top to keep icing in.]

    [Illustration: 2 Hold near top of cone. Use other hand to guide tip.
    For most work, hold cone at 45° angle.]

    [Illustration: 3 For drop flowers and rosettes, hold cone straight
    up and down. Press out icing, twist cone, and release.]




                  Try out your decorator set with our
                           CROSS-STITCH CAKE


Here is a simple-to-start with cake that lets you have fun trying out
all the decorator tips.

Tip: have an inverted cake pan handy, to try a few practice strokes on
the back. Afterwards, you can scrape the frosting off the pan and put it
back in your cone.


_Let’s get started!_

Bake cake in 15½×10½×1″ pan at 350° (mod. oven) for 25 min. Use 1 pkg.
Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix to frost cake; save 1½ cups for
Decorator Icing (p. 9). Tint ½ cup icing pale green. Make ABC’s and
cross-stitch trim using #28 star tip. Use #4 writing tip for signature
and date. Make a few flower stems in corners. Add leaves with #68 leaf
tip. Tint ½ cup icing pink. Make roses, pansies, sweet peas using #104
petal tip (see below and next page). Tint ½ cup icing yellow. Make
rosettes with #96 flower tip. Use #4 writing tip for flower centers.

TO MAKE ROSES:

    [Illustration: 1 Use #104 petal tip and flower nail. Hold cone with
    narrow opening of tip always up. Turning clockwise, make tiny circle
    for center of rose.]

    [Illustration: 2 To form first petal, make standing half circle to
    one side of center. Add two more petals, forming triangle. Add
    petals, overlapping.]

    [Illustration: 3 Remove rose from nail with kitchen shears ... cut
    almost through base of rose, place on cake, cut completely through,
    ease rose off.]

    [Illustration: A perfect cake deserves a perfect Frosting]

Pansies: Use #104 petal tip. Hold cone with wide end of tip on cake.
Make 2 flat petals, side by side. Add two smaller petals over larger
petals. Connect with 1 larger petal. Add center.

Sweet Peas: Use #104 petal tip. Hold cone at 30° angle. Make one curved
upright petal. Repeat on each side, making petals slightly flatter.




                  4 quick and easy cakes—party pretty!


    [Illustration: Forget-Me-Not Cake]

    1 Frost cake with Betty Crocker Cherry Fluff Frosting Mix, saving 1
    cup for Decorator Icing (p. 9) _before_ adding cherries.

    2 Tint ½ cup icing light blue. Make forget-me-nots using #104 petal
    tip. Hold cone with wide end of tip on cake. Make petal. Repeat,
    overlapping petals.

    3 Tint 1 tbsp. icing yellow; make forget-me-not centers with #4
    writing tip.

    4 Tint rest of icing light green. Make stems using #4 writing tip.
    Make leaves using #68 leaf tip. Overlap leaves for border.

    [Illustration: Trellis Cake]

    1 Use Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix, saving 1½ cups for
    Decorator Icing (p. 9). Tint rest pale green and frost cake.

    2 Make trellis using 1 cup icing and #4 writing tip. Make parallel
    rows about ¼″ apart. Repeat at right angles for trellis effect.

    3 Tint half of icing green. Make wreath of leaves all the way around
    the trellis using #68 leaf tip.

    4 Tint rest of icing yellow. Make small yellow roses (p. 10). Add
    green leaves with #68 leaf tip and stems with #4 writing tip.

    [Illustration: Daisy Frosting]

Bake a Softasilk Lovelight Cake for these gay frosting daisies.

    1 Use Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix, saving 1 cup for
    Decorator Icing (p. 9). Tint rest pale yellow and frost cake.

    2 Use all but ¼ cup icing to make pretty white daisies around the
    border and sides of cake. Use #28 star tip.

    3 Tint part of icing light green. Make leaves, using #68 leaf tip.

    4 Tint rest of icing yellow. Make daisy centers with #4 writing tip.

    [Illustration: Gift Wrapped Cake]

    1 Bake cake in oblong pan, 13×9½×2″. Cut in half crosswise; split
    each half in 2 layers. Spread favorite filling between. Use 1 pkg.
    Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting. Mix to frost cake, saving 1½
    cups for Decorator Icing (p. 9).

    2 Tint ½ cup icing pink. Make ribbon and bow, using #104 petal tip.

    3 Tint ¼ cup icing green. Make stems with #4 tip; leaves with #68
    leaf tip.

    4 Use ½ cup white icing for blossoms with #104; use #4 for
    lilies-of-the-valley.

    5 Tint ¼ cup icing yellow. Make rosettes with #96 tip.




       A cake without Frosting is like a birthday without a cake!




                             Birthday Cakes


    [Illustration: Birthday Bouquets]

    1 Frost 12 to 18 cupcakes with Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting
    Mix, saving 1½ cups for Decorator Icing (p. 9).

    2 Tint ½ cup icing pink. Make rose (p. 10) in center of each
    cupcake.

    3 Tint ⅓ cup icing light blue. Make rosettes with #96 flower tip.

    4 Tint 3 tbsp. icing light green. Add leaves with #68 leaf tip.

    5 Make border around edge with #28 star tip and rest of white icing.

    [Illustration: Flower Garden Cake]

    1 Frost cake with Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix, saving 1½
    cups for Decorator Icing (p. 9).

    2 Tint ½ cup icing yellow. Use ½ cup white. Cover cake with shaded
    pansies (p. 11) by putting icings into cone side by side (yellow on
    side of narrow end of tip).

    3 Tint ⅓ cup icing green. Make trellis around side of cake using #4
    writing tip. Add a few leaves with #68 leaf tip.

    4 Make rosettes with #96 flower tip and rest of white icing.

    [Illustration: Happy Birthday Cake]

    1 Frost cake with Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix, saving 1
    cup for Decorator Icing (p. 9).

    2 Tint the 1 cup icing pink.

    3 With about ⅓ icing write Happy Birthday on top of cake using #4
    writing tip.

    4 Make a scallop border around top and bottom edges using #28 star
    tip.

    5 Use same tip to make stars around edge of plate (at least 2″ away
    from cake) for each candle. Connect with scallops.

    [Illustration: Circus Cake]

    1 Frost cake with Betty Crocker Chocolate Fudge Frosting.

    2 Divide Betty Crocker Peanut Creme Frosting into 4 parts; tint red,
    yellow, green, and blue. Make ring and animal stands around top of
    cake using #28 star tip and yellow frosting.

    3 Use animal crackers for animals, straws for uprights of 11″ paper
    canopy, and a candy stick for center.

    4 Decorate sides of cake with other circus attractions using #4
    writing tip and #28 star tip with the frostings.




                       Here’s a triumph for you!
                               Doll Cake


Bake a Betty Crocker Angel Food Cake Mix in a 10″ tube pan _OR_ bake
three 8″ cake layers and 12 cupcakes using 2 pkg. Betty Crocker White
Cake Mix. Set cake on a cardboard circle cut to fit. Trim just enough to
give a rounded effect for skirt. Wrap doll below waist with aluminum
foil or pliofilm. Set in hole in center of cake (for layers, cut hole in
centers so doll can stand waist deep).

To decorate: Make Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix as directed on
pkg. Save 2 tbsp. and add 2 to 3 tbsp. _sifted_ confectioners’ sugar.
Tint rest of frosting light pink. Frost cake thinly saving 1½ cups
tinted frosting. Make Decorator Icing (p. 9). Use ¼ cup tinted icing
with #68 leaf tip to make 5 rows of scallop design for ruffled skirt.
Tint icing slightly deeper pink, use half with same tip to continue
scallop design. Tint remaining icing deeper pink and complete skirt. Use
#28 star tip with pink and white icing for flower trim on skirt and
nosegay.

Note: Cupcakes may be frosted to serve at party, in addition to Doll
      Cake, or make Petit Fours.


Party Petit Fours

Bake your favorite cake in a greased and floured jelly roll pan,
15½×10½×1″, at 350° about 25 minutes. Cool in pan. Spread thinly with
Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting, saving 1½ cups for Decorator Icing
(p. 9). Cut small shapes. Trim with flowers, scallops, ribbons or bows
to suit your fancy!




                  A cake’s party dress is its Frosting

    [Illustration: Doll cake]




                   Frosting makes a cake an occasion!

    [Illustration: Sugarplum Tree]

    1 For centerpiece shape cardboard cone 15″ tall by 10″ in diameter
    at base, or for a dessert, bake cake in tiered pans, shaving sides
    for tree shape.

    2 Frost with _stiffly beaten_ Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting,
    saving 1 cup for Decorator Icing (p. 9).

    3 Divide icing into 3 parts; tint in Christmas colors. Use #28 star
    tip for canes, #68 leaf tip in overlapping fashion for wreaths, and
    #96 flower tip for stars.

    4 To shape decorations by hand: Add enough sifted confectioners’
    sugar for easy handling. Use your own ideas.

    [Illustration: Easter Bonnet Cake]

    1 Use 2 pkg Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix, saving 3 cups
    for Decorator Icing (p. 9). Tint pale yellow; frost 9″ layers on 12″
    base. Frost base to resemble hat brim. Make “straw” design by
    pressing fork into frosting.

    2 Tint 1 cup icing mauve with red and blue food coloring. Make
    ribbon using #104 petal tip. Frost double strip of foil for
    streamer.

    3 Tint 1 cup icing pink. Make sweet peas (p. 11). Make rosettes
    using #96 flower tip and ½ cup white icing.

    4 Tint rest of icing green. Add leaves with #68 leaf tip.

    [Illustration: Clown Cake]

    1 Make cake in 8″ layers, saving ¼ cup batter to pour in prepared 3″
    custard cup. Bake cupcake with cake _15 to 20 min._

    2 Use Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix. Save 1½ cups; tint
    rest light green; frost cake, heaping frosting in mounds on top for
    ruffle.

    3 Frost cupcake white; set in center of cake. Top with frosted cone
    for hat.

    4 Make Decorator Icing (p. 9) with rest of frosting. Tint ¼ cup
    pink. Make hat brim and ruff using #28 star tip. Add white trim with
    #96 flower tip. Decorate with gumdrops.

    [Illustration: Valentine Cake]

    1 Bake cake in one 8″ sq. pan and one 8″ layer pan. Cut round in
    half; fit to square for heart shape. Use 2 pkg. Betty Crocker Fluffy
    White Frosting Mix to frost cake, saving 1½ cups for Decorator Icing
    (p. 9).

    2 Tint 1¼ cups icing pink. Make border using #28 star tip. Use #4
    writing tip for message.

    3 Make roses (p. 10) using rest of pink icing. Arrange roses
    attractively on cake.

    4 Tint ¼ cup icing green. Add leaves using #68 leaf tip and stems
    using #4 writing tip.

    [Illustration: Wedding Cake]




                              Wedding Cake


To bake cake: Heat oven to 350° (mod.). Grease and flour three layer
pans. Use 12″ layer, 9″ layer, and 6″ layer—1½″ deep. Make 2 pkg. Betty
Crocker White Cake Mix. Increase mixing time 1½ times. Divide batter
among pans—about ½″ deep in each. Bake 12″ layer _30 to 40 min._ Cool in
pan. Refrigerate other two layers until 12″ layer is done. Bake 9″ layer
near rear of oven _30 to 35 min._, 6″ layer near front _25 to 30 min._
Repeat above directions, using two more pkg. white cake mix, making a
total of 6 layers.

To assemble cake: Make 2 pkg. Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix.
Put two 12″ layers together with frosting on serving plate. Frost sides
and top. Place 9″ cardboard circle on top; then the 9″ layers put
together with frosting. Make 2 more pkg. frosting mix. Frost sides and
top of 9″ layers. Place 6″ cardboard circle on top. Repeat with 6″
layers. Mix another pkg. frosting mix. Make four times amount Decorator
Icing (p. 9), using vegetable shortening instead of butter.

To decorate cake:

1 Make scroll design for border around top and base of each layer, using
      #96 flower tip.

2 Make swag design around layers, using #68 leaf tip in overlapping
      motion.

3 Decorate top layer with lily-of-the-valley flowers and stems with #4
      writing tip. Add leaves with #68 leaf tip.

4 Make roses (p. 10) and place around cake.

5 Select a special decoration for top of cake, such as bride and groom,
      lovebirds, wedding bells, or ribbon.

To serve cake: Remove top tier. Cut vertically around and through the
center tier at the edge of the 6″ cardboard round. Cut slices of cake
and serve. Remove the cardboard. Cut remaining round of cake in
wedge-shaped pieces. Cut bottom tier the same way, using the 6″
cardboard round as guide for cutting center of cake. _Serves about 70._




                      More fun with Frosting Mixes
                        _Quick Homemade Candies_


    [Illustration: Ribbon Fudge]

Make fudge as directed on pkg. using 1 pkg. Betty Crocker Chocolate
Fudge and 1 pkg. Betty Crocker Peanut Creme Frosting Mix. Pour into
buttered 8″ sq. pan, in two layers. Makes 64 1″ pieces.

    [Illustration: Crunchy Peanut Balls]

Make fudge as directed on Betty Crocker Peanut Creme Frosting Mix pkg.,
adding 2 tbsp. instant coffee. Stir in 1½ cups toasted coconut after
cooking. Drop with teaspoon onto waxed paper. Let set.

    [Illustration: Fudge Almond Clusters]

Make fudge as directed on Betty Crocker Chocolate Fudge Frosting Mix
pkg. Add 2 cups whole toasted almonds. Drop with teaspoon onto waxed
paper. Allow to set until firm, or chill.

    [Illustration: Marshmallow Malt Fudge]

Make fudge as directed on Betty Crocker Chocolate Malt Frosting Mix pkg.
Stir in 1 cup miniature marshmallows and ½ cup chopped nuts. Pour into
buttered 8″ sq. pan. When set, cut into 32 pieces.


NEW FROZEN DESSERTS

Frozen desserts, too, can be made from Betty Crocker instant frosting
mixes.


                            Frozen Fudge Pie

Bake a 9″ pie shell. Choose either Betty Crocker Chocolate Fudge,
Chocolate Malt, or Peanut Creme Frosting Mix. Make ½ pkg.[1] frosting as
directed on pkg. Blend 1½ cups whipping cream with frosting; beat until
stiff. Pour into pie shell. _Freeze_ until firm.


                            Chocolate Mousse

Make ½ pkg.[1] Betty Crocker Chocolate Fudge Frosting Mix. Blend 1½ cups
whipping cream with frosting; beat until stiff. Chill for several hours.
Serve in sherbet dishes, garnish with toasted almonds. _8 to 10
servings._


[1]Use other half pkg. for sauce ... directions on the pkg.


NEW FROSTING FLAVORS

To Betty Crocker Chocolate Fudge Frosting, add ...

  • ¼ tsp. peppermint flavoring or ...
  • 1 tbsp. powdered instant coffee or ...
  • 1 tbsp. grated orange rind

To Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting, add ...

  • 1 tbsp. grated orange rind and ½ cup finely cut-up coconut or ...
  • ¼ cup mashed ripe bananas or ...
  • 1 tsp. cinnamon or
  • ½ cup chopped nuts or
  • 1½ cups raisins, and 2 tbsp. coarsely grated orange rind.


                       Toasted Nut Fluff Frosting

Frost oblong cake with Betty Crocker Fluffy White Frosting Mix. Sprinkle
½ cup chopped nuts over the top. Just before serving, place in very hot
(500°) oven for _3 to 5 min._ or until lightly browned. Serve
immediately.




                _EASY-DOES-IT DECORATING SET FOR $1.00_

To help you discover the fun of frosting “glamor” cakes, we’ve assembled
this special set of professional-quality nickel-plated decorator tips.
You get all five tips shown on page 8, and a flower nail, plus three
sturdy plastic lined fabric decorating cones. To get your set, just send
$1.00 (no stamps please) to General Mills Inc., Dept. 145, 623 Marquette
Ave., Mpls. 2, Minn. Limited supply—offer expires Sept. 1959.




         _Betty Crocker_ has 5 perfect frosting mixes for you!


Isn’t it a joy to know your frosting _can’t_ fail—can’t turn grainy or
runny or too stiff? With our mixes, you can be sure of a perfect,
creamy-smooth, easy-spreading frosting every time. They’re lickin’ good!
And when you add up the cost of the ingredients you’d use, you’ll see
our mixes can save you money, too!

_Have you tried them all?_

    [Illustration: Fluffy White
    a glossy white 7-minute “cooked” frosting with _no cooking_!]

    [Illustration: _New_ Cherry Fluff
    glamorous pink, bright with red cherries and subtle almond flavor!]

    [Illustration: Peanut Creme
    smooth and delicate, with bits of peanut through it!]

    [Illustration: Chocolate Fudge
    rich, dark, and chocolatey—a true cooked fudge frosting!]

    [Illustration: Chocolate Malt
    smooth and creamy milk-chocolate-mild, with real malted milk!]


              “I guarantee a perfect frosting every time!”

_Perfect!_ Yes, every mix we make for you will come out perfect, or send
the box top to Betty Crocker, Box 200, Minneapolis, Minn., and General
Mills will send your money back.

                                                         _Betty Crocker_

    [Illustration: General Mills]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Betty Crocker's Frosting Secrets, by Anonymous



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETTY CROCKER'S FROSTING SECRETS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


