The Project Gutenberg eBook of One hundred years with the Baptists of Amherst, N.S., 1810 to 1910
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: One hundred years with the Baptists of Amherst, N.S., 1810 to 1910
        A brief summary of the centenary proceedings of the First Baptist Church, Amherst, N.S.

Author: D. A. Steele
        Grace McLeod Rogers

Release date: March 25, 2025 [eBook #75713]
                Most recently updated: April 30, 2025

Language: English

Original publication: Amherst: Amherst, N.S. : [s.n, 1911

Credits: George A. Rawlyk Library, Crandall University, produced from scans generously made available by the Internet Archive.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONE HUNDRED YEARS WITH THE BAPTISTS OF AMHERST, N.S., 1810 TO 1910 ***




One Hundred Years with the Baptists of Amherst, N. S.

1810
TO
1910

A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE CENTENARY PROCEEDINGS OF THE FIRST BAPTIST
CHURCH, AMHERST, N. S.

HISTORICAL SKETCH BY REV. D. A. STEELE, D. D. AND MRS. GRACE McLEOD
ROGERS.

THIS SHORT HISTORY
 of the
AMHERST BAPTIST CHURCH
is dedicated to those who shall continue
the work begun by their fathers.

Foreword To History of The Amherst Baptist Church, Amherst, N. S.

The twin ordinances—The only ones left in His church by Her Lord—
will shew what a Baptist church stands for, and our method of
regarding them will explain our existence.

I.

Baptism is a symbol of grace, not an infallible passport to the
kingdom of God. It is the answer of a good conscience toward God; it
signifies the cleansing from sin, which can only be accomplished by
the blood of Jesus Christ This ordinance is further described as a
type of the resurrection from sin to a life of holiness, “that as
Christ was raised from the dead, we also might walk in newness of
life.” It is therefore an ordinance for the person believing in the
Christ. He thus expresses faith in Him. It is not held by us as
necessary to salvation; consequently we do not baptize the dying, or
those who by reason of sickness or of age, cannot comply with the
command.

II.

The Lord’s Supper we also consider as a clear symbol of Christ’s
giving Himself up to the death of a cross for us, and the necessity
of appropriating Him to ourselves by faith. We do not regard this
ordinance as one that places a person in a safe position, regardless
of a living faith in Jesus Christ. Eternal life is granted because a
man partakes of Him, as He declares: “He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood hath eternal life.” It is not the symbol that
saves, but the Christ Himself. We do not believe therefore that it
is necessary to give the symbol as a sacrament to the dying. We
regard the last supper as a memorial of our dying Lord to be
observed, as at the institution of the ordinance, by the church when
met together.
D. A. S.

INTRODUCTION.

One Hundred Years of History! how much it means! what changes have
taken place in all departments of life, Political, Commercial,
Social, and Religious! How much it includes! How much it reveals!

To treat of these changes many books would have be written. The
Committee in charge of this brief History will not attempt it.
Readers will have to allow their imaginations to have sway as they
read, and many events in the life of the Church and town will be
recalled to their memory. For the History of the First Baptist
Church has been one that has meant self sacrifice on the part of
noble men and women. There have been trying times—times when those
at the helm hardly dared look backward at the little accomplished,
or forward to its future labors for fear of becoming utterly
discouraged at the magnitude of the work revealed.

But the Lord of Hosts was with them, the God of Jacob was their
refuge, and through His power they were enabled to press onward;
abundantly did they merit, and assuredly have they received, the
Master’s words of commendation: “Well done good and faithful
servants.”

PREPARATORY WORK.

Anticipating the celebration of this important event in the Church’s
history, a large representative Committee from the several
organizations was appointed to consider and arrange a fitting
programme. The successful carrying out of the plans submitted seemed
a great undertaking, but loyally did the Church stand by them, and
all the members of the congregation as well entered actively into
the preparations. Especially to the pastor. Rev. P. J. Stackhouse,
much of the credit of the success is due. Although only identified
with the church for a few months previous to the occasion, he threw
himself wholly into the work, with thorough sympathy, tact and
wisdom, and during all the initiatory stages and throughout the week
of actual celebration his was the guiding hand. To Dr. Steele, who
for so many years has been identified with the labors of the Church,
is due the credit of turning back the pages of its history and
bringing before those of today the work and mission of the past
hundred years.

The Centennial Celebration was a success; from beginning to end a
hearty, happy and devotional spirit dominated the whole proceedings.

CELEBRATION BEGINS.

The Celebration began on Sunday October, 16th. The people met in the
Church, many of them the descendants of the Freemans and Blacks, and
others who constituted the first church. The Rev. J.H. MacDonald,
D.D. a former pastor, in a well delivered discourse, filled with the
great ideas of the Master, and of God’s approbation of Him, the
beloved Son in whom he was well pleased—opened the services. The
lesson was clearly set before us of His obedience and sacrifice, and
the deduction was followed all the way through that His followers in
a similar way, in this Church, as far as poor mortals can, had
devoted themselves to the Lord. It was an inspiring occasion.

CENTENNIAL SERMON BY REV. J. H. McDONALD, D. D.

Rev. Mr. MacDonald said in part: Heaven’s Commendation of a Century
of Church Life and Service, was the theme of the Centennial sermon.
The text was “There came a voice from Heaven,” Matt 3:17; 17:5; Jo.
12:28. The preacher found Heaven commending the Son of Man for three
things, character, truth and sacrifice, and then proceeded to point
out that if the Amherst Church during its century of life and
service commended itself to Heaven it must have been because
character was formed, truth appreciated and proclaimed, and
sacrifices made.

“Whatever the Amherst Church may have achieved during the last
hundred years, and it has achieved much, it has nothing in which to
glory save in Him who is its Head and the character of the men and
women it has produced. I think we can safely say today that under
its influences there have been developed men and women of godly
lives and that it has made its contribution to the Kingdom of God
upon earth, which is first, righteousness, and after that “peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost.” It has directly or indirectly elevated the
standard of life. It has shamed and rebuked the bad and made the
good better. It has caused society to be permeated with a new
leavening influence. It has sent its purifying streams to the ends
of the earth. You remember those who lived among you, those who are
still here whose lives were a continual inspiration, men who could
die, but who would not lie. Like King Arthur’s knights they revered
their conscience as their king. In their presence, impurity hid its
face, and the unseemly word died unspoken on the tongue. Aye, and
women too, some of them lived, speaking after the manner of men,
commonplace lives, but every day they walked with God and were
transfigured, and when you saw them you thanked God that all the
angels were not in Heaven. And all this they were because He dwelt
in them and they in Him. If after a century of life and service this
Church has the approbation of Heaven it is because there have grown
up within its fold men and women of goodness. For those who are
still with us in the flesh we render grateful thanks to Him, whose
workmanship we are, and

“For all the saints who from their labors rest,
Who Thee by faith before the world confessed,
Thy name, Jesus, be forever blest. Allelujah!”

FINANCIAL REPORT.

Rev. Mr. Stackhouse read a report of the financial standing of the
church showing a debt of $20,000.00 on all church properties,
including organ, parsonage, etc. $10,000.00 of this is provided for
by life insurance policies, maturing Dec. 31st. The committee having
in charge this celebration thought this a fitting time to provide
for the balance of $10,000.00 and deliver the church property from
all incumbrances. The plan adopted was to ask for pledges for the
amount to be paid half yearly for the next five years.

THE APPEAL.

Dr. McDonald was then introduced in a new role, that of
solicitor-general for the church, and so admirably fulfilled this 
office that at the close of the day the debt of $10,000.00 was 
annihilated, with a couple of thousands allowed for shrinkage.

BIBLE SCHOOL, ADDRESS BY REV. G. A. LAWSON.

In the afternoon, Rev. George A. Lawson of the First Baptist Church,
Moncton, N. B., a son of the late Rev. D. C. Lawson, who at one time
was closely identified with this Church, delivered a most
interesting address before a mass meeting of the Bible Schools. Mr.
Lawson who is an acknowledged expert in Sunday School work took as
his theme “Some values of Sunday Schools.”

His address was an able effort and greatly appreciated by the large
audience present.

SERMON BY REV. G. B. CUTTEN.

At 7 o’clock Dr. George B. Cutten, Ph.D. President of Acadia,
preached to an immense audience on the subject “The Church as an
Economic Factor,” dealing with the question from a purely financial
standpoint and in a plain practical manner proved that to remove the
Church and its influence from a town, village or country was to
decrease values; that the church was the best police force, the
greatest controlling power of the liquor and kindred evils, and in
every way enhanced the values of property. He referred at length to
the great work of the Baptist Church in Amherst and congratulated
them upon attaining this important era in their existence.

Dr. Cutten is a grandson of the late Elisha Cutten, a former deacon
of this church. Both he and Mr. Lawson united with the church under
the ministry of Dr. Steele.

LECTURE OF REV. J. H. McDONALD, D. D.

On Monday evening Rev. J. H. McDonald D.D. delivered a finely
conceived lecture on “The Poets and the Life Beyond.” Their tributes
to immortality were quoted from old Homer down through the long
series of the

“Grand old masters
Whose distant footsteps echo
Through the corridors of time.”

It was a rare occasion, and the feelings of the audience were voiced
in a tribute by C. R. Smith, K. C.

The Church is certainly under great obligation to Dr. McDonald for
his great assistance. His presence was in itself an inspiration and
benediction.

LADIES’ DAY.

Tuesday afternoon was Ladies’ Day, and in unusually large numbers
they assembled at the mass meeting of the Women’s Missionary Aid
Societies, representatives being present from Leicester, Salem, the
Highlands, and the Centre. Mrs. J. Alex. Christie, president of the
local society, presided. After devotional exercises, Mrs. J. G.
Harding gave an interesting and inspiring Historical Sketch of the
Amherst Missionary Society. Mrs. Harding is one of the oldest
members of the society, a lady, who has been closely identified with
its growth through all its years, and her earnestness in mission
work has been a great factor in the growth of the society.

MISSIONARY ADDRESS BY REV. D. E. HATT. B. A.

Rev. D. E. Hatt, B. A., of Dorchester, N. B., recently returned from
the West, delivered an address on North West Missions. Rev. Mr. Hatt
was long enough in the West to become imbued with the enthusiasm of
that great country and in his address imparted much of his
enthusiasm to his hearers, who were greatly impressed with the needs
of that section of our fair Canada. A generous collection was
secured for the North-West Mission.

CHURCH REUNION.

Thursday evening from 5.30 to 7 the Ladies of the Aid Society and
the “Don’t worry, Bible Class” served tea to a large number of the
congregation. This part of the program like all the rest was very
successful.

Then followed at 8 p. m. a service which will linger very long in
the memory of all who were present. It was designated most fittingly
as Centennial Night.

It was a service that called up many old and sacred memories, that
stirred the most sluggish imagination, and made us feel that we had
back of us a spiritual ancestry of which we were not ashamed.

CENTENNIAL NIGHT.

The Historical sketch of the Church was prepared and read by Dr.
Steele, the Pastor Emeritus. We were fortunate in having as our
historian one who has been so closely identified with the church for
a period of 43 years and who was able to write from first hand
information. The sketch showed the most painstaking and careful
research, fine discrimination, and was a concise and comprehensive
history of a fruitful work covering a period of one hundred years.

DR. TUPPER AND REV. S. McCULLY.

After the reading of the historical sketch of the church an address
was given on the subject: “Glimpses into the Lives of Rev. Samuel
McCully and Charles Tupper D. D. by Mrs. Grace McLeod Rogers, M. A.
This address clothed in beautiful and chaste language was not only a
rich treat from a literary standpoint but gave evidence of such
sympathetic insight into the lives of two of the great men of our
church that the feeling was unanimous that it must have a place in
the report of our Centennial Celebration.

This most inspiring of all the services of Centennial week was
brought to a close with the singing of the old hymn “O God the Rock
of Ages.”

FRATERNAL SERVICE.

Wednesday evening another large audience was present at the
Centennial Fraternal Service. Pastor Stackhouse presided and on the
platform with him and participating in the services were the
Venerable Dr. Steele, Dr. Chapman and Rev. J. K. Bearisto, Rev.
Anderson Rogers of St Stephen’s Church, Rev. E. H. Ramsay of Knox
Church Rev. H. Wigle of Trinity Methodist Church, Rev. L. S.
Crandal, pastor of the Baptist Church, Oxford, Rev. A. L. Powell,
Gaspereaux, and Rev. S. Walter Schurman, Lockport Brief
congratulatory addresses were given by all, and the general
expression was of thankfulness and congratulation for the great work
the Church has accomplished in its one hundred years its present
prosperity and its future prospects. Special mention was made of the
magnificent result of Sunday’s appeal, when the total indebtedness
of the Church was provided for. Letters were read from former
pastors. Rev. W. E. Bates and Rev. S. W. Cummings, and from
assistant pastors, Rev. G. O. Gates, D. D., Rev. J. Austin Huntley,
Rev. A. F. Newcombe, Rev. Johnston L. Miner, Messrs. Fred F. Foshay
and George Keirstead and from Rev. G. W. Schurman and Dr. C. Eaton,
all expressing their regrets that they were unable to participate in
the exercises of the church which had been so much to them in the
years gone by.

CLOSING SERVICE.

Tuesday evening the celebration program was fittingly brought to an
end by a devotional service, in which all the past and present were
transformed into a new consecration for the future. Pastor Stackhouse
gave a brief address on "Retrospect and Prospect," and Dr. Steele
also spoke briefly. Letters were read from a number of non-resident
members; also one from Rev. T. Richard Peede, of Port Chester, N. Y.,
a former pastor of the church. Short reminiscences of the past were
also given by Deacons Layton, Read and S. Freeman, and by Mrs. G. B.
Smith, after which the service was brought to a close, the deep
feeling of the members being that the Church had been wonderfully
blessed in its work in the past and particularly through the
celebration, and that the same devotion to service would ensure even
greater accomplishments in the future.

THE MUSIC.

One feature of the celebration, which has not been referred to in the
above, was the magnificent program of music carried out by Miss Mabel
Cole, the leader, and her faithful choir. It was not an easy task to
provide new and interesting music for all the various services of the
celebration, but Miss Cole was more than equal to it, and the program
was exceptional in its variety as well as its perfect rendition.
Among those who took part in the solo, duet and quartette numbers
were Messrs J. L. Ralston, Dr. Burrell, S. L. Lawson, A. D. Sopp, J.
W. Fraser, Geo. Shiers, E. Marney, F. Bishop, F. Thompson, Mrs. A.
Betts, Mrs. S. L. Lawson, Miss Lawson and Mrs. C. C. Black, Miss
Helen Lawson, Miss Simpson. A mention of the names themselves,
without further particularization, is a sufficient guarantee that the
special selections were of a very high class.

PRESENT OFFICERS.

The church now enters the first year of its second century, and the
officers who are now in charge of its destinies, and who will
maintain its best traditions for harmony, service and progress are:—
Pastor—Rev. P. J. Stackhouse B. D.
Pastor Emeritus—Rev. D. A. Steele D. D.
Church Missionary—Miss Alice Logan
Assistant Pastor—Rev. J. T. Dimock
Clerk—W. S. Porteous
Treasurer—G. B. Smith
Deacons—J. M. Layton, Wm. Read, Samuel Freeman, J. Avard Black, D. W.
Freeman, B. J. Lawson, M. M. Tingley, J. A. Christie, and W. W.
Black.
Deacons at the out-stations—W. O. Logan, Salem; Alex Clegg, East
Amherst; and Amos S. Logan, Amherst Point.

Thus was carried out a programme embracing the essential points, but
how much was left out only those know who have had to perform like
services. The history of a Church, with its struggles, its plannings,
its difficult questions, as well as in its days of victory, cannot be
places on paper not uttered in speech.

Historical Sketch Of The
Amherst Baptist Church.

BY D. A. STEELE, D. D.

WHO CAN WRITE the history of a church? There are so many incidents
that go to make up  its life, which have passed out of mind. It is a
long story of a hundred years, and comparatively few things have
been committed to writing or preserved in memory.

It is necessary to say at the outset that no one is in a position to
do more than present the merest outline. The Church kept no records
of its proceedings until the close of the year 1842. Steps were then
taken to collect as far as possible from those then living an
account of the doings of the Church for the thirty-two years
preceding, and also a correct list of the members. On February 7th,
1843, the Rev. Charles Tupper, with Deacon Thomas Stokes Black, and
Brethren Samuel Freeman 1st, and William Logan met at the house of
Thomas S. Black on the rising ground nearly opposite the estate of
Hon. Hiram Black, Upper Victoria Street, when the following facts
were collected:—

The beginnings of the Baptist cause in Amherst are traced back to
Henry Alline, who in his evangelistic tours visited this place in
1781 and 1782. He was a man gifted with the power of persuasion; of
an all consuming zeal, with a heart yearning for the salvation of
his fellow men. He made many converts here.

The parents of those in advanced years with whom the writer
conversed in the first days of his pastorate here, were aroused to
repentance during the visits of this remarkable man. Mr. Alline was
summoned before a self-constituted court in this town, but as they
had no authority, and the people sympathized with the evangelist,
nothing could be done. He preached here, at Amherst Point, Fort
Lawrence, Fort Cumberland, Sackville, and Bale de Verte, as we learn
from his journal. He speaks of “the darkness” which rested upon the
people and the ministers. No doubt there was more or less of
formalism, and the flaming discourses of such a man would make a
deep impression. At any rate, the effects remained in a number of
converts here and in adjacent places. He left his converts in
Societies, somewhat loosely bound together, but was indifferent in
regard to baptism.

A spiritual tone characterized his converts, and the emotional side
of their religion was prominent, but there was a clear line drawn
between them and the world, and the nominal professors of
Christianity.

The teaching of this good man, we learn from the records we are
perusing, was followed up by Rev. T. Handley Chipman, who was pastor
at Nictaux, “with considerable success—” Sometime after, the Rev.
Harris Harding preached with “success.” It is noted that the above
were all of the New-Light Order. That was the designation of
Alline’s followers. They were supposed to have received new light on
the momentous matters of human redemption from Sin. They were taught
in preaching and in hymns, of which Mr. Alline had a collection of
his own composing, that man was a fallen being, but that God for
Christ’s sake, was ready to forgive any repentant sinner here and
now, and that the joy of salvation and peace in believing were the
authentic evidences of being born again.

I quote the old record: “The Rev. Edward Manning next preached
amongst us, who having previously embraced Baptist sentiments,
called the attention of the people to the subject of Baptism, as
also did the Rev. Joseph Crandall, of Salisbury, N. B.” Mr. Alline
made little of this ordinance. The teaching of the last two
brethren, led people to investigate this matter, and the result was
that, “several persons went forward in that ordinance,” viz.
Baptism.

We come to a statement that will surprise many. The date of the 
organization of this Church has been long fixed as 1810; hence our 
centennial proceedings have been arranged for this year, 1910. But 
here is the authorized deliverance of the men who were but 
thirty-four years from the founding of the Church, at the head of 
whom, is their pastor Charles Tupper, who were conversant with the 
people, who formed the Church, and two at least of whom Thos. S. 
Black and Samuel Freeman were of the original members. We find it 
distinctly recorded that, “In 1809, a small Baptist Church was 
organized by the Rev. Joseph Crandall.”  Our date therefore must be 
corrected. We are celebrating the centennial just a year after the 
real date.

The record proceeds:—“For some time they were without a pastor, but
were occasionally visited by ministering brethren.” I find the name
of Rev. T. H. Harding as one of these. “In 1819, the Rev. Charles
Tupper began to spend a portion of his time with the Church,
although he resided twenty miles distant.” This means that he was
pastor of the Church at River Philip, and gave this Church a portion
of his time.

The record continues:—“In 1821, the Rev. Samuel McCully, who after
having preached some time as a New Light had been baptized and
ordained, took the pastoral charge. In 1827, he resigned in favor of
the Rev. Charles Tupper, who had removed to Amherst. They labored
harmoniously each some portion of the time up to October 1832, when
Mr. Tupper resigned the pastoral charge, and subsequently removed to
Prince Edward Island. Immediately after the Rev. Samuel McCully was
invited to assume the office of Pastor, which he did, and continued
in that office until he went to labor in Shepody in 1841. In the
spring of 1842, Rev. C. Tupper by invitation of the church again
accepted the Pastoral charge.”

The record further goes on to state that in 1818, the church
consisted of 18 members; and the following list is given of all who
had belonged to the church up to that time.

MEMBERS.

Thos. S. Black Deacon, died January 24th, 1850, (He was a brother of
Rev. Wm. Black, the apostle of Methodism).
Augustus Baxter, died Nov. 7, 1818.
Samuel Freeman, who lived till June 21st, 1860, when he died at the
advanced age of eighty-eight.
Joshua Freeman (moved to Canada.)
Philip Freeman (moved to Canada.)
John Boss.
Zerabel Holmes, Little Forks
George Boss, “ “
Rufus Freeman,
Wm. Freeze Black,
Samuel McCully, Died Aug. 12, 1849.
Robert Seaman,
Wm. Freeman (Clerk)
Desiah Freeman,
Elizabeth Porter,
Elizabeth Grant,
Isabella Seaman,
Hannah Cameron, (moved to Canada.)
Margaret Donkin,
Elizabeth Seaman,
Sarah Terris, (moved to Canada.)
Deborah Boss,
Samuel Fage, (Died)
Lucy Bent, (Died)

These, we are told are all who had belonged to the Church up to that
time, so this list contains the most of the names of the original
members.

Following on the above is a list of the members for 1831, numbering
twenty-seven, an advance of three in thirteen years. Coming up to
the time when these memoranda were collected by the Committee above
mentioned we learn that in June 1842, the Church contained
thirty-seven members whose names are given.

We find the old standards still alive, and in addition the names of
Elisha B. Cutten (Grandfather of President Geo. B. Cutten) and Wm.
Donkin, (Grandfather of W. F. Donkin, Town Clerk) who are deacons,
and other names, who remained until the writer’s day.

Thereafter notes are made of the additions, the dismissals, and the
deaths. All the oldest part of this first record is written in a
business hand, but after the above facts are set down, the writing
changes into a small cramped hand, probably that of the late Wm.
Logan, who was clerk after this for some years. The first entries
are brief. “Baptist Church met in conference,” occurs continually,
with no other remark.

Sometimes there is an extended note such as this: “Nov. 28, 1846.
Resolved that members of the Baptist Church absenting themselves for
three successive conference meetings, shall be visited to ascertain
the cause of such absence.”

Or this: “At the conference meeting held June 14th, 1845, Bro. Wm.
Freeze Black was chosen to fill the office of Deacon, and was
ordained on the Sabbath morning.”

“This would be five years before his father Deacon T. S. Black died.
These items show that the Church was watchful over its members, and
careful in appointing its officers, and setting them apart according
to the model in the New Testament. An entry in 1851, shows that the
Church felt the necessity of distributing good literature. Brother
Wm. Logan volunteered to act as colporteur thro’ the county at a
small salary, and thereupon certain brethren, whose names are
written here, “Engage to sustain him for four months.”

It is noteworthy that in 1851, Elder W. G. Parker was engaged as
Missionary to destitute parts of this county, and that several
brethren whose names are given, engaged to make up any deficiencies
in his salary.

These entries shew the spirit of the Church. The brethren always
responded, as they have continued to respond, to any legitimate call
upon them.

In September 1850, the pastor. Rev. Chas. Tupper, who had faithfully
served the Church, and built up the members in their holy faith,
resigned, and in the following March, Rev. John Francis was engaged.
He was a warm-hearted Welshman, his talent being of a different
order from Mr. Tupper’s.

There arose quite a stir in his time, and some valuable additions
were made to the membership. He continued nominally as pastor, but
was absent frequently on Missionary excursions, and finally resigned
in Feb. 1853.

Elisha Budd DeMill, a young man of ability, highly educated, was
next called, and on October 2nd, 1853, on Sabbath morning, he was
ordained. The Rev. E. A. Crawley, D. D., preached the sermon. Revs.
Samuel Robinson of St. John, and W. G. Parker taking part in the
Ordination service. The names of W. W. Bent and Chas. Tupper, M. D.,
are recorded as among those who guaranteed to pay Mr. DeMill’s
salary quarterly, being not members, but friends and well wishers.
During his pastorate, in 1854, the property of two acres with house
and barn, was purchased for a residence for the minister, for the
price of £400 or $1600. This was situated between Electric Street
and Crescent Avenue, bounded on the S. W. by Maple Avenue.

The Sabbath Schools are reported as being in an efficient state, and
contributions were forwarded to the Association for the general
objects of the denomination. An item in the records of this year
(1854) shews that the Church again recognizes the duty of sending
the Word of God to the destitute in other parts of the county.
“Brother J. E. Cogswell, has been employed by us for the last six
months as Missionary; his labors have been blessed to the conversion
of many souls.” We feel the impetus given to the Church under the
new pastor, and the fine band of men gathered closely around him.
The subscribers’ names are given, and shew that they gave largely to
the parsonage, the sums ranging from £50 to £2. The Church is
getting into business habits. The accounts are rendered regularly,
and appear in proper order.

Discipline is a marked feature in this middle age of the Church, e.
g. Conference appointed E. B. Cutten to visit a brother, “to
ascertain if he had taken out a license to sell ardent spirits.”
Brethren are dealt with “for refusing to comply with the rules and
regulations of the Church” and for other causes. The temperance
question at this time came into prominence, and although the
opposition was strong against the stringent measures proposed,
resolutions were passed that members using intoxicating stimulants
as a beverage should be subject to discipline.

There was need of Church action, for there are traces of the old
drinking habits, and members are sometimes reported as giving way to
this vice.

In 1855 constant additions by Baptism occur. The good seed sown by
pastors McCully and Tupper germinates and bears fruit. All is
gladness. On successive Lord’s Days numbers were baptized. This goes
on for eleven occasions, the names of the candidates being given.
The ministers aiding in this good work are: Brethren Miles, McKeen,
Foshay (grandfather of F. F. Foshay), McPhail, and Brother DeMill,
the pastor. In this year, ’55, the meeting house at the Head of
Amherst was opened, and trustees appointed for the same. The meeting
house at Salem had been dedicated in February 1853, and the house at
Amherst Point, June 5th, 1853.

After four years faithful service, in 1857, Mr. DeMill resigns, “the
amount of labor being too heavy for him.” Rev. David Lawson’s name
appears several times at about this date, as laboring here and at
River Philip, and the amounts are set down which were paid to him.
This esteemed man was father of Deacon B. J. Lawson.

Rev. James Edward Balcom became pastor Nov. 12, 1857, at a salary of
£100, and use of mission premises, “to be kept in repair by Mr.
Balcom.” This seems a close bargain, but the Church generally paid
the bills. In 1858 a meeting continuing a few days, is held, and
nine baptisms result. Brother Balcom had the Missionary spirit in
large measure, and accessions in all parts of the field mark his
ministry. Some of our best material was brought in by this good man.
He labored successfully until July 1860, when he resigned in
consequence of ill-health. In a few years afterwards he passed away,
as did also his predecessor, Mr. DeMill, both in their prime.

May 26th., 1861, Rev. G. F. Miles entered upon the pastorate. Mr.
Miles was a man of commanding presence, and of great enthusiasm; his
personal influence was strong, and many were attracted to his
ministry. At this date the Church had reached the number of 216
members. True to its record it sends all monies on hand to the Rev.
A. R. R. Crawley, towards supporting a native preacher in Burmah,
and also agrees to supplement the deficiency in Rev. D. McKeen’s
salary at River Philip and vicinity. The Church grew; the second
Meeting-house which was built in Amherst for Baptist worship was
opened on the seventh of June, 1863. During Bro. Miles’ ministry,
large congregations gathered there. It was the scene of many notable
gatherings. The Convention of the Maritime Provinces was held here
in the year it was opened. In 1864 additions became frequent. Bro.
Miles was greatly blessed. To show the esteem in which the pastor
was held, a donation was organized, of which notice was printed in
the Sackville Borderer and circulars were addressed to the churches
within twenty miles. Mr. Miles resigned the charge in the spring of
1867. After various supplies. Rev. D. A. Steele came from Canso,
where he had been pastor for two years. This brother arrived here
and commenced his ministrations on the first Sunday of December,
1867. An accession of members took place in the following spring;
Rev. S. McCully Black and Deacon Wm. Read came in at this time, with
others, who became strong in the faith. After laboring alone till
’72, it became necessary to secure additional assistance in the
pastorate. Bro. George O. Gates, then a student, came to our help
during the summer vacation. In a year or two the assistant pastor
became a fixture, and has been continued ever since, a long
succession of worthy men having remained with us for one or more
years. Under the ministry of Bro. Steele and assistants there was a
steady growth, not only in numbers but in gifts and graces. The
spiritual life was developed by doctrinal preaching, and the young
converts were assiduously trained in the elements of Christianity.
The benevolences of the church gradually increased. There were times
of refreshing when converts came in companies of 33, (1868), 54,
(’76), 21, (’80); with D. L. Chubbuck assisting in 1883, 87 were
added; in 1889, Dr. E. M. Saunders assisting, 82. In 1895, 96, 58,
as the result of evangelistic services. But it must be said that
gracious results followed the ordinary means of grace. On the
completion of twenty-five years in the pastorate, Mr. Steele was
presented with an address accompanied by a silver service, a salver,
and one dozen silver spoons. During the last years of his pastorate
the present Church was built and dedicated in 1895.

After baptizing in the mill-pond, in all weathers, for thirty years
the pastor with a little effort was enabled to accustom himself to
the dimensions of the font near the pulpit. In this new Church
several memorial windows were placed, the first being erected by Sir
Charles Tupper Bart., in memory of his father, the Rev. Charles
Tupper, D. D., the first pastor of the Church. Dr. Steele preached
one year in the new edifice, and retired as honorary pastor in
September 1896. In 1870 the Women’s Missionary Aid Society was
formed here by Miss Maria Morris, (afterwards Mrs. W. F. Armstrong),
who had been baptized in Canso during Mr. Steele’s pastorate there.
This was the second society organized, the first having been formed
at her native place a few weeks earlier. At this period a great
interest was aroused in Foreign Missions, and our independent
movement was greatly assisted by these Societies. The Amherst
Society has maintained a record, the results of which will only be
known in the Great Day.

Dr. Steele’s long pastorate of twenty-nine years was succeeded by a
series of short pastorates. Rev. McDonald, who had been assistant
pastor, took the oversight in the fall of 1896, and remained until
1899, when he was called to the Principalship of Acadia Seminary.
Mr. McDonald was a leader specially gifted in the training of the
young people. He organized the Men’s Bible Class which has continued
to flourish.

Rev. Welcome E. Bates, who spent some years in Nova Scotia, and then
returned to his native Connecticut, took the oversight from 1899 to
1904. His methodical style of preaching was appreciated. Mr. Bates
was always present at our Conferences in the County, and other
denominational gatherings. The Church bade farewell to this good
brother and his estimable wife in the fall of 1904, and proceeded to
call the Rev. Selden W. Cummings, a native of Truro, who for some
years had practised law there, and then yielded to the call to
minister the Gospel to others. He came here from Chester, Pa. He
immediately spread the net, and the result was the largest
ingathering in the history of the Church. The growth in all
departments was continuous. The Men’s Bible Class received an
impetus and became a rallying place for the men of the congregation.
The gallery was built in the auditorium, which increased the seating
capacity, and drew the congregation and pulpit closer together. A
pipe organ had been installed in Mr. Bates’ time, which with the
gallery aided the acoustics. To the regret of the Church, Mr.
Cummings resigned his charge and left at the end of 1908, to assume
the pastorate of the Church in Lowell, Mass.

In 1907, Miss Maud Harrison, who had labored ten years in India,
together with Miss Patton, were taken by the church as their
representatives among the Telugus, the Church becoming responsible
for their salary. Miss Alice Logan in the same year was appointed as
assistant to look after the women’s work in the town.

On July 17th, 1909, Rev. T. Richard Peede took charge as pastor. On
account of Mrs. Peede’s health, this brother, whose preaching was
much appreciated, resigned after four month’s residence, and went to
Port Chester, N. Y., and L. E. Ackland, Mr. F. F. Foshay, the Pastor
Emeritus, and others, took the pastoral work during the long
interval of eighteen months. At last in the good Providence of God,
the Rev. Perry J. Stackhouse B.D. took the pastoral oversight on the
first Sunday in May, 1910.

Historical Resume.

As we have seen, there resulted from the New Light Movement an
impetus to what are known as Baptist Principles. Not that the whole
of the Baptist position was at once seen, but it gradually dawned
upon the converts that there must be a Church order. They were made
glad when occasionally one of the Hardings, or a Manning, or a
Dimock visited them, by hearing the explanation of the New Testament
system; repentance and faith followed by baptism and the Lord’s
Supper; then covenanting to walk in holy fellowship with one
another. They were taught that there must not only be a Church, but
that the body so constituted should have its regularly appointed
officers, pastors and deacons. Old men have pointed out to the
writer the place where these first ministers stood in the large room
with open fire place, with its rude seats of boards to which the
neighbors would come with earnest longings, to hear the word of the
Kingdom. Wm. Logan who had known the beginnings of the Church used
to relate how the few members, from six to ten in number met at the
house of Samuel Freeman 1st, near the present Freeman residence one
mile west of the Court House. This was where the monthly Conference
of the Church was held for many years and in this house the Church
was organized. Here there used to gather the small band whose names
we find in this first Church book. There were Thomas Stokes Black,
Samuel Freeman, the owner of the house, Joshua and Philip Freeman,
Wm. Freeman, the first clerk, Samuel McCully, Wm. Freeze Black
(baptized when eleven years of age about the time the Church was
founded); the tall forms of Wm. Logan and his brother-in-law, Wm.
Donkin, with Elisha B. Cuttenand Thomas Embree and wife, Mrs.
Margaret Logan, (wife of Hugh 2nd), Mrs. Miriam Tupper and Mrs.
Edward Baker would be seen wending their way to this old farm house.

We find in the minutes of the association of 1810, sitting at
Sackville, N. B., the membership is reported as 15, the smallest
number in the list of churches. The “messengers” are Thomas S. Black
and Wm. Freeman. Sackville reports 55 members, Salisbury 46, Digby
Neck 69, Newport 90, and Horton 270. The growth of the Church was
slow. In 1818, 23 members were reported to the association; in 1824
the number goes down to 10; in 1830 the number rises to 30;
dwindling to 26 in 1837; in 1839 there was 29; in 1841, 28; but
thereafter there is a steady increase. In 1851 the number is 112; in
1861, 216; in 1871, 262; in 1881, 315; in 1891, 508; in 1901, 609;
at the present date (1911), 870.

In addition to the long established branches of the church at
Amherst Point, Salem, and Warren, since 1890 a Mission has been
conducted in the Southern Highlands. It began in a humble way with a
Sunday School taught by some devoted sisters. The school was held in
private houses until a permanent service developed. A small meeting
house was opened in 1902. The Mission with its Sunday School
occupies the talents of a body of happy workers: it will soon be
enlarged. Services are regularly held on Sunday and in the mid-week.

The young people have from 1868, received special instruction. When
the B. Y. P. U. movement started the youth of the congregation were
embodied in a more formal way, and have pursued the courses of
instruction laid down by the Union, and kept up their own spiritual
and social services. In 1896 the banner for Biblical study was
awarded to the Amherst Young People’s Society. The last phase of
organization of the Junior members of the Church is the Young
People’s League of Service.

The Amherst Church has been interested from the beginning in the
educational work of the denomination. T. Tupper was one of the
founders and moving spirits of the Institutions at Wolfville; and
several of the governors have been members of the Church. There
remains an old subscription list which attests that the sympathy
with the College was more than nominal. In an old return dated May
4th, 1855, J. W. Barss, Esq., being treasurer, by Benjamin Douglas,
we find the sum of £50 10s 6d as the amount collected at that time,
with apologies for not sending a larger sum. There are also receipts
for scholarships for £100, and other more substantial sums, in aid
of the Forward Movements on the behalf of Acadia. Students of both
sexes have attended these schools, some of whom are now occupying
prominent positions.

Glimpses into the Life of Rev. Charles
Tupper D. D., and Rev. Samuel McCully.
BY GRACE MCLEOD ROGERS.
(Adapted for Publication)

The two men whose history I am to give you glimpses of this evening,
Rev. Charles Tupper and Rev. Samuel McCully, were associate pastors
of this Church, and its earliest regular ministers. They were men of
deep piety, of independent thought, and great and exceeding zeal.
Largely through their efforts this Church arose to adorn our town
today, and the story of their labors runs like a gold thread through
all its annals.

Rev. Charles Tupper was one of the most notable preachers of our
Baptist Faith. His grandparents emigrated to Nova Scotia from
Connecticut, in 1763, taking up lands of the evicted Acadians.
Charles was born in Cornwallis, in 1794, one of a family of
fourteen. Very early in life he showed a love for study, but
opportunity for schooling in those days was limited. Dilworth’s
speller. Grammar and Arithmetic, were his only text books. At the
age of ten he could read and cipher tolerably well. After this time
he says he received only twelve week’s schooling, and whatever
knowledge and learning he afterwards gained was obtained by his own
efforts.

Books were scarce, but all that came into the lad’s hands were read
with avidity. An old English law-book furnished him some brain food
at the age of fourteen, and he perused with great profit a volume
called “A Demonstration of the Beings and Attributes of the Deity.”

In this book he first met with Latin passages, and felt a desire to
learn the language evidently so essential to a scholar. But
realizing that he did not yet understand the grammar of his own
English tongue he decided to review the text-book of his early
childhood, and taking down his dusty Dilworth’s from the shelf over
the clock, began anew his studies. In little more than a year he had
so thoroughly mastered its contents that he was enabled to begin the
Latin tongue.

Through all this period he was engaged in regular work on his
father’s farm, and had small leisure for study. He would keep his
books open on his knees, while eating at meals, and carry them with
him to bed, studying far into the night as his candle would burn,
and once every week walked four miles to his instructor, Rev. Mr.
Forsyth, for recitation. When nineteen years of age he had gained
such insight into the new language and become so well versed in
English branches, that he was able to take up school teaching for
himself, and taught his first school in the Western Section of
Cornwallis.

About this time the young man became deeply interested in religious
matters, and he attended services held by Clark Alline, a nephew of
the noted and notable Newlight Evangelist. It seems strange to us,
in these unemotional days to read of his experiences and impressions
throughout the period of his conversion, weeks and months of despair
and melancholy, fasting throughout whole days and often spending an
entire night prostrate in prayer. The doctrine of Election was a
great stumbling block to him demanding that he make no effort on his
own behalf, and torturing him with the belief that because so long
delayed, he was not a chosen son of God. Finally, one morning, just
at daybreak, after remaining the whole night in prayer, alone, in
his little school house, he received the “Light” and from that day
till his death never once doubted his conversion, or God’s
continuing love.

A number of his ancestors in Massachusetts and Connecticut had been
ministers of the gospel, and Charles felt a call to follow in their
steps and devote himself and his life to Christian service. He
preached his first sermon when twenty-one years of age, labored for
a time in Cornwallis, Rawdon, Parrsboro and Advocate, and was
ordained at Canard, Kings Co.

On January first, 1819 he came to a new field, the churches at River
Philip, Westchester and Amherst. He spent that entire New Year’s day
of 1810 in fasting and prayer, that he might become thoroughly
consecrated to his great work.

A short time previous to this he had been united in marriage to
Miriam Lockhart Lowe, of Parrsboro, a widow with five small
children, but a very comely and capable widow, who not only had Mr.
Tupper’s devoted affection throughout her life, but proved an
admirable and inspiring helpmeet.

For two years he lived at River Philip, then removed to Amherst,
residing first in the dwelling known as the “John Church house” and
later building for himself a home at the corner of the John Black
road. He preached regularly at Amherst, River Philip, Minudie and
Cape Tormentine, visiting the sick and conducting funerals over this
entire section. From Tormentine the way could scarcely be called a
road, but over the forty miles of rough pathway he travelled at
regular intervals, full of religious fervor. In addition to all
this, at the earnest solicitation of the people he taught the
Grammar School at Amherst, observing in his diary that his
necessities required the compensation, as his salary was extremely
moderate and but little of it received in cash.

He was dowered with an infinite capacity for work, so that he could
run and not be weary, and walk and faint not During his arduous
labours in church and school he found time to study both French and
German, Hebrew and Greek, Spanish and Portuguese, Italian and
Syriac, and before he was fifty years of age, had read the entire
Bible through in all these tongues, by aid of Grammar and dictionary
alone.

In 1825 and again in 1833, for two periods of time, he left the
field here to his colleague, Mr. McCully, and engaged in work with
churches in New Brunswick, and on Prince Edward Island, but in 1834
returned to Amherst and remained on the circuit until 1851, when he
finally resigned the charge to take a new field of labor at
Aylsford, Annapolis Co.

While absent from home making arrangements for removal of his family
to the new Parish his estimable wife sickened and died. The sad
intelligence was conveyed to him when he reached Parrsboro on his
return. It proved a great shock, but in his diary he quaintly
observes that he is “abundantly sustained by the knowledge that she
is forever released from her tribulations.” In less than a year he
had found a successor, a maiden lady of much intelligence and piety.
Miss Mary Miller, of Aylsford. Strangely enough, this wife also was
removed in death during Dr. Tupper’s absence from home, and again he
records the bereavement with due resignation of assurance in her
relief from her many trials. So abundantly was he sustained on this
second occasion that in six months he married again, a Mrs. Knowles
of Avondale, daughter of Rev. George Dimock, a most worthy and
gentle woman who outlived him, and cared for him with great
tenderness through his failing years.

A grand-daughter, to whom he confided the announcements of his
betrothal to his third wife, strove to expostulate with him for his
haste in choosing a successor. “All you say is true my dear” he
replied with his gentle courtesy, “but my years are numbered and I
cannot afford to wait.” So in spite of his zeal and piety, and
though he had the gift of tongues so that he could understand all
knowledge, he was just a mere man as far as marrying was concerned.

For many years he was Pastor of the Lower Aylesford Church, and in
addition to this charge made extensive tours in the interests of
Acadia College, founded temperance Societies and assisted in
conducting, as well as being a regular and valued contributor to the
“Christian Messenger” and the “Baptist Missionary Magazine.” In 1857
he was honored by Acadia University with the degree of Doctor of
Divinity, and well did he merit the gift.

After resigning active pastoral work at Aylesford he resided at
Kingston, but never relinquished his loved labors for the church of
God, and to his death preached the gospel with great power, often
returning to Amherst, the church of his first charge, and always
recording the visits in his journal with the naive expression that
while at Amherst he preached for dear Dr. Steele with great
acceptance both for himself and the people.”

These farewell sermons were for many years an annual occurrence and
will long be remembered. From Dr. Nathan Tupper’s own family to the
most outlying district round about, all the children of Baptist
faith were secured and with their elders, wedged tight in the family
pew to hear “Dr. Tupper’s farewell sermon”—always from the same
text, “Finally Beloved,” etc., and always the same treatment. One
lady distinctly remembers nine of these occasions. But the
discourses, though lengthy and unvaried, brought ever a message of
hope and cheer to some hearer, and I hope we all with like fervor
would assemble our families today, were we given the opportunity to
hear from the lips of this old Father in Israel, his last words to
his loved people.

His diary first published in the Christian Messenger, and many
portions of it copied in Dr. Bill’s History of the Baptists is good
reading, so elegant in diction, yet so stilted, so naive and free
from reserve, so thoroughly a mirror of the heart and soul of the
man who penned it.

In his last years he was captious and somewhat dictatorial, but
always courteous and kindly. Once when tarrying for a night at my
uncle’s house, he sent back the cup of tea poured by his hostess,
with the remark that he drank only milk and water. The cup was
exchanged, and a steaming one of the cambric concoctions delivered
in its place. Cautiously tasting it he said “It is too hot, madam,”
and unabashed returned the drink to the pourer. Duly cooled with a
generous addition of cream, once more the cambric tea journeyed down
the table. Again it was tasted. “It is now too cold, madam,” rebuked
the guest, and undaunted by reserve sent it yet a third time on its
peregrinations. “Thank you, my dear madam,” said the little old
minister heartily, as he drained the contents at the close of the
meal. “It is the very best cup I ever drank,” thus thoroughly and
courteously wiping off any old scores to the contrary. “And always
after that I understood the doctrine of the Perseverance of the
Saints” my aunt would say, as she told the tale.

Everybody who knew him remembers some quaint story of his ways and
conceits, and everybody knew as well his self denial, his
forbearance, his faith, his charity, and his love, and how truly his
lips and life expressed the holy gospel he professed.

In the month of January, 1881, Dr. Tupper died. They laid him away
amid the snows of his Happy Valley.

Over his grave they sang the hymn he loved so well, the hymn he had
chosen for his burial, that fine old hymn of Samuel Stennett’s:—

“Majestic sweetness sits enthroned
Upon the Saviour’s brow,
His head with radiant glories crowned,
His lips with grace o’erflow.”

Often had he sung it through on his lonely journeyings, often at the
close of a sermon repeated the stanza:—

“To him I owe my life and breath,
And all the joys I have;
He makes me triumph over death
And saves me from the grave.”

And now to heaven, the place of his abode, God had at last brought
his wearied feet.

“His hands were folded on his breast,
The long disquiet merged in rest.”

Rev. Samuel McCully was associate pastor with Dr. Tupper in the
early years of the Church. His parents were Scottish-Irish
Presbyterians. They emigrated from the north of Ireland to the
district known as Cobequid, about the year 1770, and from this
ancestry he inherited his keen, canny brain, and the brooding Celtic
soul of the seer.

Samuel was born in Cobequid in 1773. When about twenty years of age
he removed to Nappan and settled on the property now known as the
Experimental Farm, where he became engaged in husbandry and 
ship-building. Meeting with heavy losses in the latter, he gave up his
property there, and took up his residence at Amherst Point, building
the house which is now occupied by Mr. Bright Pipes. In 1799 he was
married to Esther Pipes, a daughter of Mr. Wm. Pipes of Nappan, a
licensed Wesleyan preacher who held meetings throughout the
district.

Soon after his arrival in Cumberland County, Mr. McCully was asked
to attend the services conducted by Elder Joseph Crandall. At first
he refused, thinking that it would be showing disrespect to his
father who had especially charged him when leaving home “Not to hear
any of those wild people, the Newlight Baptists.” But he finally
consented to be present at one of the meetings, and there for the
first time in his life heard Baptist Principles expounded. The new
dogma proved very attractive to the young man. He became deeply
interested in its tenets, and also greatly concerned about his own
salvation. After a long period of serious thought he experienced a
very wonderful conversion of heart, and decided to unite with the
Baptists, making public profession of his faith in due course of
time.

His first appearance as a preacher was in 1805. He had attended a
Wesleyan gathering over which Mr. Pipes his father-in-law was to
preside. Mr. Pipes failed to appear. The congregation waited long
for his coming, and were just about to disperse when Mr. McCully
arose and volunteered to take the service. It was his first effort
but it was no weak attempt. His voice was deep and rich toned. He
presented his views with striking aptness and originality, and from
the opening words to the close, his lips seemed touched with coals
from off the altar. The people were melted to tears, and a deep and
powerful impression was made on all present.

In 1820, the year following Dr. Tupper’s settlement at Amherst, Mr.
McCully was ordained to the public ministry, and became associate
pastor with Dr. Tupper. Though lacking early opportunity for
scholastic training, his education had been by no means neglected.
By wide reading and a remarkably correct and retentive memory he was
not only a bible student, but was largely informed on affairs of the
world. And his command of language and the readiness with which he
was able to quote from standard works, gave him great power as a
speaker.

His mind was of a philosophic and logical cast He delighted in
argument, but though strong in his own beliefs he always respected
the rights of his opponent, and never wounded an antagonist, for he
was eminently a man of peace. In the capacity of peace-maker he was
frequently appealed to in settling disputes and differences
throughout his own parish, and in the churches at large. By a fine
discernment and discrimination, he was always able to put his finger
on the place, and say “thou ailest here and here.” His advice and
counsels were greatly esteemed, and his opinions upon doctrine and
discipline held in high regard.

These peace making, peace loving qualities, united with a sound
judgment, were inherited by his grandson. Rev. Samuel McCully Black,
the late Editor of the Maritime Baptist, and our unity as a
denomination, today, our large outlook, and the “peace in our utmost
borders,” are in a great degree due to the man who for the last
twenty years so wisely steered our Baptist Ship of State.

As agent for the American Bible Society, Mr. McCully frequently
travelled through the provinces, also in the formation of Temperance
societies. But though he received calls from the churches at Onslow,
at Charlottetown, and the Granville Street Church at Halifax, he
seems never to have been willing to leave his home, and the charge
in Amherst During Dr. Tupper’s several periods of absence, he
fulfilled all the duties and demands of the large field, and on each
return joined with him most heartily in their united efforts.

Very early he formed peculiar views about receiving a salary,
objecting as he expressed it, to “being a hireling in his Master’s
Vineyard.” Possessing a good farm and comfortable living of his own,
he was able to rear his large family without aid from the Church,
and though doubtless receiving many gifts in expression of his
service, he accepted no regular remuneration through all the twenty
nine years of his pastorate.

As a preacher I have heard it said that he was some times slow of
speech, and hesitating, but his thoughts and sentiments were always
elevated, and on most occasions he would be uplifted with a
spiritual influence and speak with great power and eloquence. His
sermons were usually long, often exceeding the allotted time, and
the story is told that on one occasion, just as he had finished his
“fourthly” and had launched out into the exhortation to sinners, a
sound of stamping feet was heard in the little church porch, and in
walked a much belated “brother” from the regions round about the
Point. Pausing in his peroration, Father McCully sized up the
situation, and arriving unassisted at a decision, announced to his
long-suffering listeners, that as this good brother lived at a great
distance, and was thereby debarred from frequent attendance upon the
means of grace he would preach the sermon through again for his
benefit. There was no clamorous clock on the post office tower in
those days to make the congregation restless, and from firstly to
finally, the long discourse was repeated.

In the summer of 1849, at the age of seventy six, this fine old man
of God died. One week before his death he preached a strong sermon,
and seemed full of energy, but suffered a stroke of weakness at the
close of the service, and sank gradually through the ensuing days
till the fifth of August, when he passed peacefully away to his
reward. He is buried down at the old Town graveyard on Lower
Victoria Street, and his labors are ended, and his busy brain at
rest.

For many years his son Robert McCully, barrister, lived here in the
town, ministering to this church as Deacon, and enriching the life
of the community. Another son, Hon. Jonathan McCully, Judge of the
Supreme Court, also lived here and labored for your interests in
Town and County. Dr. Nathan Tupper went in and out among you,
healing and caring for your sick, and giving freely of his substance
to his father’s Church. Sir Charles Tupper, Bart., was likewise a
resident, represented you in Parliament, and became an honor to the
Nation at large.

But they with all the other immediate members of the two families
are long gone from our midst, and strangely enough there are none,
of the name and blood combined, Tupper or McCully, on our Church
roll today.

But well do we all know that we have one among us, who through many
years, by her labors for the cause, by her home thrown ever open to
pastors and people, and by her generous gifts in every time of need,
has made the McCully name linger with us like the fragrance of a
sweet flower, like the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, like
a light that burns all night, like a fire that needs no
replenishing. Lying now on a sick bed, unable to join in the Jubilee
week of the Church she loves so well, we offer her from full hearts
this tribute of affection.

Do not forget these two early Fathers of our Faith. Sometimes, when
you are sitting here, glance up at the beautiful window given by Sir
Charles in memory of Dr. Tupper’s ministry. When you are passing the
old graveyard on Victoria Street, go in, and find the tombstone
erected in memory of Elder McCully. Think of their labors on our
behalf, their vigils with our sick and dying, their counsels in
troubled times, their long and weary journeyings. Remember all the
prayers and tears with which they consecrated this church.

They climbed the steep ascent of Heaven
Through peril, toil and pain,
 O God may “Grace to us be given,
To follow in their train.”

Our Meeting Places.

Our Church Edifices.

We append some notes in regard to the three places of worship, which
have been occupied since 1819.

The congregation in the early years of the nineteenth century
worshipped in private houses, and also in the first Court House on
Lawrence St. In 1819, a meeting-house was erected which stood on the
northern part of the site of the present Church. “This site was
kindly offered by Phillip Freeman,” we read in an old record, the
price named being £15. This comprised the whole lot occupied by the
present structure. The rules and regulations, drawn up in the clear
hand writing of Charles Baker, Esq. then Registrar of Deeds, set
forth that “The Baptist Society of Amherst have the appointment of
trustees, and that said meeting-house when not occupied by the
Baptist minister shall be open and free to any denomination of
ministers, wishing to prevent none from approaching the throne of
grace and mercy for forgiveness and salvation.” The fourth
regulation is, “that each subscription of above Five pounds be paid
in money, butter or neat stock, to be at the valuation of men chosen
by the parties; if under five pounds, to be paid in money or butter,
provided that any person may take a job or contract for materials or
labor, with the trustees, for a part or the whole of their
subscription.” The conclusion is worth reading, as shewing the
social state of affairs at that day. “We therefore, whose names are
hereto subscribed, feeling the necessity of a house being set apart
for the worship of God in this township, and willing to do our part
on removing the inconvenience of being without a house of public
worship in the centre of the said township of Amherst, for the
furtherance of so laudable a work, approving and agreeing to the
above regulations, do severally promise to pay to the Trustees, viz,
Wm. Freeman, T. S. Black, George Revell, (an English Baptist who
lived here for some years, and built several brick houses), and
Luther Lusby, the survivor or survivors” etc. Then follows the list
of names and the amounts subscribed by each. The signatures of the
forefathers are here, embracing the names of the families in the
surrounding townships. With one or two exceptions the names are
still in the county. They were not all Baptists, though in the
religious changes which subsequently took place, many of them
identified themselves with the Baptist Church. Numbers came in
declaring “We will go with you, for God is with you.” Here is the
record in fading characters with the signatures of the ancestors of
those who now form a large part of the Church. Here is seen a lesson
of zeal for the Lord of Hosts, and their determination like the
Hebrews of old to build a tabernacle for the Most High.

In the deed of trust for this first meeting-house the proviso is
made that four Trustees shall be appointed by other Protestants, and
that each set of Trustees is to guard certain rights and privileges,
and the deed has the signature affixed of ten persons; the
additional names are Thomas Embree, Wm. Donkin, Thomas Logan, Rufus
Freeman, and Wm. Freeze Black. In a note just before the names of
the witnesses there is this proviso: “It is agreed that neither
denomination shall disturb the other during their association. The
Baptists within mentioned to be considered those of the Calvinist
Baptists.

“Signed and sealed in the presence of
Charles Baker.
Patrick Sullivan.”

The word “association,” evidently refers to the common meetings of
the church.

This first building was a box like structure 42 ft square with
double rows of ordinary windows, like a two storey residence; the
lower tier had segment tops. The first pulpit was of the stilted
sort with sounding board over it, as was the fashion in those days.
The cost of the building was about $2000.00. In this building
consisting of a single room were conducted all the services of the
Church and Sunday School. In the course of years, as other
denominations provided places of worship the building came into the
hands of the Baptists exclusively. This was the home of the Church
for forty-four years.

The following is a description of the second meeting house. The
building was in rectangular form, 80x45 ft, with basement vestry 40
ft square, and was surmounted by a tower and spire which reached the
height of 130 ft This Church was dedicated June 7th, 1863.

It cost $8,000.00, and seated 600. The spire was found to injure the
building, and was removed in 1874. At the back of the pulpit, was a
pipe-organ, with ascending seats for the choir, Major J. A. Black
rendering his services as organist and choir leader gratis for
thirty years. At the opposite end of the audience room was a
crescent shaped gallery, with seats for one hundred and fifty. At
the head of each window was the figure of a descending dove, a
gentle reminder of the descent of the Holy Spirit upon our Gracious
Lord at His Baptism. The acoustic qualities of this Church were such
that the lightest intonations of the preacher’s voice were
distinctly audible at the farthest part of the building. There were
many notable gatherings during the thirty years this building was
occupied. There being no hall in town capable of containing a large
audience the Trustees were frequently called upon to open the doors
for temperance and other lectures. There was one assemblage of
historical interest, when a special session of the Convention of the
Maritime Convention was held May 12, 1875. The occasion was to
decide where the Baptists should concentrate their Foreign Mission
forces. Some desired to labor among the Siamese, or among the Karens
who lived in Siam. Others strongly urged that we continue to labor
in Burmah; while a third party urged that the Baptists of the Lower
Provinces unite with the Baptists of Ontario, in their endeavour to
win over to Christ the Telugus in British India. After a discussion
lasting from 4 p. m. Wednesday till Friday at noon, it was decided
that our Missionaries be instructed to occupy a part of the Telugus
field, acting in harmony with our brethren in Ontario and Quebec.
This accordingly has been our Foreign Mission field ever since. This
church was removed in 1894 to a site in the rear; turned into a
musical hall; burned down August 2nd, 1908.

The congregation was increasing, and more accommodation was called
for. After much deliberation, it was decided to erect a substantial
structure equipped with all modern facilities for carrying on Church
work. With quarries of sandstone near the town there could be no
long hesitation in deciding of what material to build. The result is
the present Church fronting on Victoria Street on the old site in
the heart of the town. The lecture room was opened for worship March
10th, 1895. This is on a level with the main audience-room, with
which it is connected by folding doors. This church occupies the
whole of the site of the two former edifices. Easy staircases at
front and rear lead to the second storey of the lecture room, where
are rooms for the different Classes. There are also rooms for the
Ladies’ meetings on the ground floor, and cosy corners in the towers
which are utilized by the teachers. The Baptistery is at the side of
the pulpit in full view of the Congregation. The windows of chaste
design mellowing the light, are restful to the eye of the
worshippers, the seats are comfortable without the aid of cushions,
and the whole effect is inspiring.

To the above account of the meeting place must be added the three
other church buildings, one at Warren, and one at Salem, one at
Amherst Point. Regular services are held in these places by the
assistant pastor. Each has a Sunday School and social services are
held weekly. With the chapel in the southern part of the town, the
total is five congregations.

THE MEANING OF ALL THIS.

We have come to the end of the minutes. What does this record for a
hundred years indicate? These old manuscripts traced by hands long
since gone to dust tell us that these people believed that they were
called with a Holy Calling; that it was their duty to shew forth the
works of Him who had called them out of darkness into His marvellous
light. They adopted the old doctrine that when they were Baptized,
they were Baptized into his death, and that henceforth they must
walk in oneness of life. That they observed the two grand
outstanding ordinances of the new covenant. Baptism on the
profession of their faith in their risen Lord, and the memorial of
his dying Love, the Supper instituted by Him for all His followers.
That they walked in fellowship with one another, and often met
together to talk with one another of the all important matters of
the soul. That they confessed that they were still angers and
pilgrims here, and that the object of their pilgrimage on earth was
to obtain an enduring inheritance in a better Country, that is an
Heavenly.

Also, that they as a Church exercise a watch care over one another.
If any were reported as having gone astray it is not left with the
pastor alone; Brethren are appointed by the Church to confer with
them, and to win them back. Nor need it be supposed that these
remonstrances ended in a report to the Church. If brethren remained
contumacious they were set aside or excluded. In many instances
discipline had a salutary effect. The wandering members came back
and were gladly received into their fellowship. It is also seen that
the Church recognized its obligation to give the Gospel to the
world. It is on record that this Church took up the collection in
the Maritime Provinces for Dr. Judson when he established himself in
Burmah as a Baptist Missionary.

From all these, we readily infer the divine origin of the Church. It
is a society of Christians who associate to help one another in all
that pertains to good honorable lives; to encourage one another when
in trouble; to bear one another’s burdens and so to fulfil the law
of Christ. A real Church, will, like its Divine Lord, be filled with
tender solicitude for the lost sheep.

We are ready to confess that the ideal has not been attained; but we
humbly claim that in striving for this we and our fathers have had
such an uplift as could not otherwise be possible. For whatever this
Church has been, for whatever it has done through a long line of men
and women, we, their successors desire to render the glory to Him,
whose spirit has ever prompted to such a course, and who by His
Grace has strengthened us to do His Will.

THE ASSISTANT PASTORS OF THE CHURCH

Rev. George O. Gates, D. D., when a student at Acadia spent three
months in the summer of 1872. Mr. Tate from Newton Theological
Seminary spent the vacation of 1873 with us.

As the town grew the work at the branches could not be overtaken by
any one man. After the above dates Rev. J. I. DeWolfe* spent one
year; Rev. R. I. Skinner* two years; Rev. Wm. George* (hiring the
years 1879-81. Rev. Geo. R. White.*

Mr. Gates, brother of G. O. Gates, was with us during the summer of
’86, Rev. C. W. Corey during 1887, Rev. Mr. Gehring, Rev. A. S.
Kempton,* Rev. J. H. McDonald, Rev. H. G. Estabrooks, W. H. McLeod,
Johnson Miner, A. F. Newcombe, J. A. Huntley, M. A. Richardson, J.
T. Dimock, Ernest Brooks, Lemuel E. Ackland, F. F. Foshay, G. C. R.
Keirstead.

*Deceased.

THE LICENTIATES OF THE CHURCH

Hilbert Black* (son of Dea. W. F. Black). S. McCully Black* (D.
D. and editor for twenty years of denominational organ). Joseph H.
Pipes* (died before completing his education), Absalom Powell,
(pastor in the United States and this Province)
Walter S. Black, (pastor in the North-West). Charles A. Eaton
D. D., (pastor in Natick, Mass.; Bloor St., Toronto; Cleveland,
Ohio; Madison Ave., New York. Geo. B. Cutten, Ph. D. (Yale), pastor
in New Haven, New York, and Ohio, now President of Acadia
University, Wolfville N. S.
Geo. A. Lawson, pastor West end Halifax, and now of Moncton.
W. M. Steele* B. A. Acadia and M. A. Yale, Pastor Greenville S.
C. and Professor of Philosophy at Furman University, S. C.
Wm Travis, Pastor in the North West.
M. S. Richardson, pastor Prince St., Truro, N. S.
Ernest J. Brooks, pastor at Rawdon.
David Dixon, pastor in Digby Co.

NOTE:—

Revs. Geo. W. Schurman, Stephen Schurman, and David Crandall were
also members of this Church, but were not licensed by us.

*Deceased.

THE DEACONS OF THE CHURCH
DURING THE ONE HUNDRED YEARS.

Thomas Stokes Black*, (the first and probably for many years
the only deacon; he was the son of the first Wm. Black, and brother
of the Rev. Wm. Black, the apostle of Methodism).
W. Freeze Black*, (son of Thomas S. Black, who was five years
deacon contemporaneously with his father). Wm. Donkin*. Elisha B.
Cutten*, (These two brethren were deacons in 1842).
Samuel Taylor*, Salem.
Cyrus Black*, (clerk for many years), Moses Lowe* and Robert
Embree*, were elected and ordained on Nov. 3rd, 1885; Robert
McCully*, (son of Rev, S. McCully* died May 19th, 1878).
Amos Blenkhorn* (prothonotary, died March 24th, 1892, aged 86).
A Torrey Bent*, (died 1897, aged 86 yrs.)
J. M. Layton, (who has served under every pastor in the
church).
Thomas R. Black*, (Grandson of deacon T. S. Black, Senator of
the Dominion, died Sept 16th, 1905, aged 74)
M. D. Pride.*
Geo. W. Christie* (Died July 31st, 1908)
Wm. M. Read, (prothonotary).
Hugh Logan, 3rd* (died Sept 24th 1906, aged 79).
D. F. Quigley, (removed to Vancouver B. C.)
Hebert Freeman*, (died July 23rd, 1905, aged 46.)
Samuel Freeman, 3rd.
D. Wilbur Freeman.
J. Avard Black.
B. James Lawson.
Amos Logan.
Wilbur O. Logan.
Alex Clegg.
J. Alex Christie.
W. W. Black.
M. M. Tingley.
*Deceased


Centennial Program.

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 16th.
MORNING SERVICE, 11 O’CLOCK.

Doxology and Invocation.
Hymn No. 118.—“O God Our help In Ages Past”
Scripture Reading
Chant, Psalm XC.—“Lord Thou Hast Been Our Dwelling Place”
Prayer.
Solo—“Out Of The Deep.” Marks.
Mr. J. L. Ralston.
Offering.
Anthem—“The Lord Is Exalted.” J. E. West.
Hymn No. 119.—“When All Thy Mercies.”
Centennial Sermon—Rev. J. H. McDonald, B. A.
Hymn No. 131.—“My Soul Repeat his Praise.”
Benediction.

SUNDAY, 2.30 P.M
MASS MEETING OF BIBLE SCHOOLS.

Centre and Highlands.
Address—Rev. Geo. A. Lawson.
Offering.
Double Quartette—“Consider and Hear Me.”—Pflueger.
Mrs. Black, Mrs. Betts, Miss Lawson, Miss Simpson, Messrs Bishop,
Lawson, Shiers, Marney.

SUNDAY, 7 O’CLOCK.

“Glory to Thee, My God This Night.” Gounod.
The Choir (Mrs. Betts, Soloist.)
Hymn No. 87—“The Lord is King.”
Scripture Reading.
Solo—“If With All Your Hearts.” (Elijah) Mendelssohn.
Dr. R. H. Burrell.
Prayer.
Offering.
Anthem—“Praise The Lord, ye Heavens Adore Him.” E. Turner.
The Choir.
Sermon—Rev. G. B. Cutten, Ph. D., President Acadia University.
Quartette—“Jesus Lover of My Soul”
Miss Hazel Lawson, Mrs. S. L. Lawson,
Messrs. Lawson and Sopp.
Hymn No. 59—“Now The Day Is Over.”
Benediction

MONDAY, OCTOBER 17th, 8 P. M.

Chairman—The Pastor.
Solo—“The Ninety and Nine”—Champion, Selected.
Mrs. A. Betts.
Lecture—“The Poets And The Life Beyond”
 Rev. J. H. McDonald, B. A.
Duet—“Eventide” Nevin.
Messrs. Lawson and Shiers

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 18th, 3 P. M
MASS MEETING.

Baptist Women’s Missionary Aid Society.
Amherst, Amherst Highlands, Salem, Leicester.
Chairman—Mrs. J. Alex. Christie, President Amherst Society.
Hymn.
Scripture Reading.
Prayer.
Hymn.
Historical Sketch of Amherst Missionary Society.
Mrs. Jesse Harding.
Solo—“Just For To-day” Abbott
Mrs. C. C. Black.
Address—Subject, North-West Missions.
Rev. D. E. Hatt, B. A.
Silver offering for North-West Missions.


TUESDAY, OCTOBER 18th.

CENTENNIAL SUPPER 5.30 to 7 P. M.
For members of Church and Congregation.
Committee in Charge > The Women’s Aid Society
Mrs. Rogers’ Bible Class

CENTENNIAL NIGHT, 8 P. M.

Chairman The Pastor.
Doxology and Invocation
Hymn No. 671—“I Love Thy Kingdom Lord”
Reading Scripture.
Prayer.
Solo—“The Good Shepherd”—Barri
Mr. A. E. Sopp.
Historical Sketch of Church—Rev D. A. Steele, D. D.
Male Quartette—Selected.
Messrs. Fraser, Thompson, Shiers and Sopp.
Offering.
Hymn No. 670—“Christ is made The Sure Foundation”
Address—“Glimpses into the Lives of Rev. Samuel McCully 
and Charles Tupper, D. D.”—Mrs. H. Wyckoff Rogers.
Solo—Selected
Mr. Fraser.
Address—“Brief Reminiscence of the Past”
Deacons Layton, Read, S. Freeman
and Mrs. G. B. Smith.
Anthem—“The Radiant Morn.” Woodward.
The Choir.
Hymn No. 138—“O God the Rock of Ages”
Benediction.

WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 19th, 8 P. M.

Centennial Fraternal Service.
Chairman The Pastor.
Ladies’ Chorus—“God is Watching Over All”—Abt.
Scripture Reading and Prayer.
Hymn No. 128,—“The Lord Our God is King”
Reading of Letters from former Pastors and assistant pastors.
Offering.
Solo—“Close to Thee” Briggs.
Mr. S. L. Lawson.
Congratulatory Addresses. Ministers of Town.

Duet—“My Faith Looks Up to Thee” Nevin.
Messrs. Lawson and Sopp.
Congratulatory Addresses Baptist Ministers of County.
Anthem—“Pilgrims of the Night”—Parker
The Choir
Hymn No. 654—“Blest be the Tie that Binds.”
Benediction.

A special invitation was extended to congregations of the other
churches of the Town to unite with us in our Fraternal Service.

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 20th, 8 P. M.

Led by Pastor.
This was a service of Prayer, Praise. Testimony,
Thanksgiving and Consecration.
Address—Subject—“Retrospect and Prospect.” The Pastor.
Letters were sent to all the non-resident members of the Church
requesting that they send a few words of Greeting to be read at this
service.


Resident Members.

Ackles, Mrs. Netis D., Spring
Allaby, A. W., 80 Havelock
Allaby, Mrs. A. W. “
Allaby, Bertha S. “
Allaby, Annie Kezia “
Anderson, Edward, 35 Poplar
Anderson, Mrs. Edward “
Anderson, Bessie “
Anderson, Mrs. Edgar J., Victoria
Anthony, Parker, Lower Victoria
Archibald, Mrs. Allan, Havelock
Atkinson, Mrs. Edgar, East Amherst
Atkinson, Florence “
Atkinson, Mrs. Hazen, Fort Lawrence
Ayer, William G., Clarence
Bailey, Hattie May, 44 Clarence
Baird, Charles, East Amherst
Baird, Mrs. Charles “
Baird, Pearl  “
Baird, Loyd M. “
Baird, Clifford A., 73 Spring
Baird, Mrs. C. A. “
Baird, Mrs. John  “
Barnes, Albert, 38 Albion
Barnes, Mrs. Albert “
Barnes, Flora, Spring
Barnes, Ida, 220 Victoria
Baxter, Mrs. Milford, Truemanville
Beharrel, Harold G., Mill
Beharrel, Mrs. H. G.  “
Benjamin, James, 30 Pleasant
Benjamin, Mrs. James “
Benjamin, Vernon B “
Benjamin, Sadie “
Bent, William, Summer
Bent, Mrs. William “
Bent, George H., Salem
Bent, Calvin Gay, Brookdale
Bent, Mrs. C. G. “
Bent, Mrs. Benjamin, East Amherst
Bent, Mrs. Walter, 44 Copp
Bent, Mrs. Charles H., 253 Victoria
Bent, Mary L. “
Bent, Mrs. Harmon, Salem
Berry, Mrs. Alfred, off Pleasant
Betts, Mrs. Daniel D., 6 Prince Arthur
Betts, Mrs. Arthur, Albion
Bickerton, Bliss, Cornwall
Bickerton, Mrs. Bliss “
Bickerton, James
Bishop, William C., Patterson
Black, Gains L., 36 Havelock
Black, Mrs. G. L.  “
Black Ada “
Black, William W., 214 Victoria
Black, Mrs. W. W. “
Black, Frances Mary “
Black, J. Avard, 15 Rupert
Black, Mrs. J. A. “
Black, Mary “
Black, Florence E. “
Black, Hazel M. “
Black, Bernard B., 34 Havelock
Black, Mrs. B. B. “
Black, Catherine Amelia “
Black, Blair, Salem
Black, Thomas A., Truemanville
Black, J. Albert., 28 Havelock
Black, Mrs. Fred, East Amherst
Black, Mrs. Ainsley, 8 Rupert
Black, Mrs. Hiram, Upper Victoria
Black, Mrs. C. C., 216 Victoria
Black, Mrs. J. Botsford, 17 Eddy
Black, Sadie Jane, Victoria
Blair, Mrs. Fred L., 71 Havelock
Blenkhorn, Mrs. Burton, 12 Patterson
Blenkom, Eliza, Hickman
Blosse, Herbert J., 50 Pleasant
Boomer, Mrs. Winslow, West Amherst
Boomer, Herbert “
Borden, Joseph E., 54 Church
Borden, Mrs. J. E.  “
Borden, Lucy “
Bowles, Fred, Chamberlain
Bowles, Mrs. Fred “
Bowles, Frederick Borden “
Bowles, Eda Alberta “
Boyce, Benjamin, 5 Albion
Boyce, Mrs. Benjamin “
Brigas, Russell, Ratchford
Brooks, C. R., East Amherst
Brooks, Mrs. C. R. “
Brown, Albert “
Brown, Mrs. Albert, Willow
Brown, Mary “
Brown, Mrs. John, Academy
Brown, Mrs. Allan, Alma
Brown, Jeremiah Leonard, 9 Pleasant
Brown, Mrs. J. L. “
Brown, Olive Fisher “
Brown, Ethel Lucy “
Brown, Sadie Victoria “
Brownell, Hessel Victor, Tyndale Road
Buchanan, William A., 35 South Albion
Buchanan, Mrs. W. A “
Bulmer, Mrs. Mary, 41 Albion
Burgess, Mrs. Robie, 17 Eddy
Cain, Fred, Commerce Block
Cain, Mrs. Fred “ “
Caldwell, Burpee, 18 Eddy
Calhoun, Mrs. W. B.
Cameron, Mrs. Eliza   Rupert
Campbell, Alexander, Brookdale
Campbell, Celia “
Carlisle, Alice, Pearl Place
Carroll, Mrs. John, 39 York
Carter, Kelton, East Amherst
Carter, Emeline, Truemanville
Carter, Nina, Clarence
Carter, Mrs. Edward, Crescent
Carter, C. E., Church
Carter, Mrs. C. E. “
Carter, Mrs. Blair, Rupert
Chapman, Mrs. Wm. W., Hastings
Chapman, Mrs. E. T., 68 Church
Chapman, Mrs., Victoria
Christie, Mrs. Charles, 59 Albion
Christie, Emily “
Christie, Norman “
Christie, Warren, Church
Christie, J. Alexander, 44 Albion
Christie, Mrs. J. A. “
Christie, Helen “
Christie Herbert R. “
Christie, Mrs. Fred 52 “
Clegg, Alexander, East Amherst
Coates, Mrs. Samuel, Brookdale
Coates, Mrs. Israel “
Coates, Roland “
Coates, Emma “
Coates, Mrs. Stephen, 16 Rupert
Coates, J. Sanford, 11 Clarence
Coates, Mrs. Harold, 30 Havelock
Colchester, Frank, 11 Ratchford
Colchester, Mrs. Frank “
Cole, Mariner, Melrose
Cole, Mrs. Mariner “
Cole, Mrs. Bedford, Davidson
Cole, Melborne A., Dundonald
Cole, Mrs. M. A.
Cole, Charles M., 49 Victoria
Cole, Mrs. C. M. “
Collins, Martin, Brookdale
Cook, James, 52 South Albion
Cooke, Mrs. James “
Cooke, Mable “
Cooke, Edgar R., Pleasant
Cooke, Mrs. G. W., 58 Havelock
Cooke, Asa Martin, Poplar
Cooke, Mrs. A. M.
Copeland, Mary, Amherst Point
Cosman, Mrs. M. B., 87 Spring
Costen, Albert A., East Amherst
Costen, Mrs. Arthur “
Costen, Marion Elizabeth “
Cox, Mrs. John, West Amherst
Crandall, Sabron, Hastings
Crease, Mrs. A. J., 78 Havelock
Crocker, Hollis W., 72 Spring
Crossman, Mrs. Charles 8 Abbott
Crossman, Mrs. V., Minto
Currie, James, 88 Havelock
Currie, Mrs. James “
Curry, Mark Robie
Daniels, Mrs. Annie, 30 Havelock
Darby, William Lusby
Darby, Mrs. William “
Dashwood, Mrs., Lower, Victoria
Davis, Mrs. J. Alder, 60 Havelock
Davis, May, 36 Victoria
Delesdernier, William Alfred
Delesdernier, Mrs. W. A.
Delesdernier, Mrs. Charles, off Albion
Dennis, Mrs. Calvin, 10 Abbott
Dickinson, Mrs. J.
Dickson, Mary H., W. Amherst
Dixon, Alvin, 7 Prince Arthur
Dixon, Mrs. Alvin “ “
Dixon, Mrs. Annie, 113 Spring
Dodge, Gladys, Amherst Point
Doncaster, Allan, Lower Victoria
Doncaster, Mrs. Allan “
Doncaster, James, Pleasant
Doncaster, Leander, Westmorland Point
Doncaster, Wiley, Fairview Ave
Doncaster, Annie Rena, Chamberlain
Doncaster, Russell E. “
Doncaster, James Leslie, “
Doncaster, George, Lower Victoria
Douglas, Mrs. George, 232 Victoria
Doyle, Charles Benjamin, 9 Alma
Doyle, Mrs. C. B. “
Doyle, John Edward, Minto
Doyle, Mrs. J. E. “
Doyle, Mrs. William, 22 Eddy
Dunphy, Thomas
Dunlap, H. D., 29 Croft
Dunlap, Mrs. H. D. “
Duxbury, James, 26 Albion
Duxbury, Mrs. James “
Duxbury, Mrs. George, 12 Palmer
Dyas, Mrs. Thomas, Salem
Eaton, Fred, 2 Erncliffe
Eaton, Mrs. Fred “
Edgett, J. M., 20 LaPlanche
Edgett, Mrs. J. M. “
Edgett, Blanche
Enibree, George, East Amherst
Embree, Mrs. George “
Embree, Ernest “
Embree, Clement, 244 Victoria
Embree, Effie 75 “
Embree, Mrs. Henry, East Amherst
England, Samuel W., 43 Park
England, Mrs. S. W.
England, Leila Belle “
England, Ethel Naomi
Fage, Thompson Hastings
Fage, Ethel
Fillmore, J. L., Pleasant
Fillmore, Alice “
Fillmore, W. A., 24 Crescent
Fillmore, Fred
Forrest, Charles, East Amherst
Forrest, Helen B. “
Forrest, Lizzie “ “
Forrest, Mrs. Garnet “
Forrest, DeMill, Amherst Point
Forrest, Edwin
Forrest, Charles 2nd “
Forrest, Isaac “ “
 Forrest, Mrs. George W. “
Forrest, Nellie “
Forrest, Mrs. Walter
Forrest, Munro, Beacon
Forrest, Laura L., East Amherst
Foster, Mrs. A. W., 44 Havelock
Foster, Mrs. Elmer, Hastings
Fowler, Thomas, Amherst Point
Fowler, Amos Fowler, George R., 18 Belmont
Fowler, Mrs. G. R.
Freeman, D. Wilbur, 19 Rupert
Freeman, Mrs. D. W.
Freeman, Jennie Hallett “
Freeman, Samuel, Lower Victoria
Freeman, Mrs. Samuel “
Freeman, Fretia “
Freeman, Ina Loneta “
Freeman, Samuel Demont “
Freeman, Burton, East Amherst
Freeman, Mrs. Burton “
Freeman, Mrs. C. Ed., 101 Spring
Freeman, Mrs. George, Victoria
Freeman, Hattie Ellen “
French, Mrs. James, 21 Clifford
Fromm, Mrs. George, LaPlanche
Fullerton, Stanley B., 4 Copp
Fullerton, Mrs. S. B. “
Furlong, B. J., 134 Church
Furlong, Mrs. B. J. “
Garnet, John A., off LaPlanche
Garnet, Mrs. J. A. “
George, Maud, Hastings
Gillespie, Mrs. W. John, Rupert
Gillespie, Elizabeth “
Gillespie, Katherine B. “
Gilroy, Arthur W., 83 Victoria
Gilroy, Mrs. A. W.
Gilroy, Fraudina “
Gilroy, Rebecca E.
Gervan, Mrs. Albert, Dundonald
Goldsmith, Mrs. Charles, 6 Electric
Goodwin, Mrs. Harry, Hastings
Gordon, James Peter, 62 Havelock
Gordon, Mrs. J. P.
Gourley, Carlisle, Brookdale
Gourley, Mrs. Carlisle “
Grant, Mrs. Mariner W., Prince Arthur
Greenough, Winnifred, Spring
Greenough, Lillian “
Halfkenny, John, Off Pleasant
Halfkenny, Mrs. John “
Hanright, Mrs. E.
Hanright, Mrs. C., off Albion
Hanright, Charles O. “ “
Hanright, Charles P. 25 “
Hanright, Mrs. C. P. “
Hanright, James Cecil, Pleasant
Hanson, Mrs. William, 9 Eddy
Harding, Mrs. Jessie G., 4 Rupert
Harding, Bessie, 4 Rupert
Harding, William E., 220 Victoria
Harding, Mrs. W. E. “
Harris, Charles Herbert, Mill
Harris, Mrs. C. H. “
Harrison, Leander, 35 LaPlanche
Harrison, Mrs. Leander “
Hatfield, Helen, 2 Charles
Hayward, Mrs. W. Warden, Dundonald
Hayward, Elma H. “
Hicks, Mrs. Rufus, South Albion
Hickman, Annie, Hickman
Higgins, Frank E., Academy
Higgins, Mrs. F. E. “
Hill, George A., Pleasant
Hillson, Mrs. C. T., Havelock
Holmes, Charles, 89 Church
Holmes, Mrs. Charles “
Holmes, Florence, South Albion
Hopper, Mrs. Harry, Prince Arthur
Horton, James, 8 Croft
Ibbitson, Nettie Elizabeth, 44 Clarence
Ibbitson, Annie May, West Amherst
Jackson, Theodore H., Church
Jackson, Mrs. T. H. “
Jackson, Sophia Gladys “
Jackson, Mrs. W. “
Jackson, Mrs. Mel. T., 14 Croft
Jackson, Andrew Harding, 47 Eddy
Jenks, Mrs. F. L., 212 Victoria
Jenks, May “
Jones, Mrs. James, Lower Victoria
Jones, Viola J., 24 Crescent Ave
Jones, Mrs. Hannah, 52 Church
Jones, Lizzie “
Keillor, Thompson, Amherst Pt
Keillor, Mrs. Thom., Amh. Pt
Keillor, Parkinson “
Keillor, Mrs. Parkinson “
Keillor, Mrs. Lawrence “
Keillor, Maud “
Kennedy, Mrs. Stephen, Alma
Lafergy, Maud, 2 Copp Ave.
Laws, Mrs. John, 100 Spring
Laws, Lena B. “
Lawson, B. James, 78 Church
Lawson, Mrs. B. J. “
Lawson, Leita Leith “
Lawson, Edith “
Lawson, Solomon L., 108 Spring
Lawson, Mrs. S. L “
Layton, James M., 196 Victoria
Leaman, Gilbert, 4 Robie
Leaman, Mrs. Gilbert “
Leaman, Georgina W. “
Leaman, Mrs. Frank
Loder, Mrs. Daniel, 12 Prince Arthur
Logan, Charles, Amherst Point
Logan, Stanley “
Logan, Mrs. Stanley “
Logan, Bessie “
Logan, Amos, West Amherst
Logan, Fremont “
Logan, Mary “
Logan, Harry A. “
Logan, Wilbur, Salem
Logan, Mrs. Wilbur “
Logan, Mrs. Hugh “
Logan, Alice M., Victoria
Long, Thomas, 27 Havelock
Long, Mrs. Thomas “
Lowe, Mrs. Seaman, 12 Croft
Lowe, Mrs. Clarence, 36 Clarence
Lowe, Rosie Belle, Pleasant
Lowerison, Wm. A., 31 Copp Ave.
Lowerison, Mrs. W. A. “
Lowerison, Erica Aurlea “ 31 Copp Ave.
Lowerison, Mrs. Selwyn, 38 Copp Ave.
Lowther, Sherman, Poplar
Lowther, Mrs. T. P., Victoria
Lowther, Mrs. George, 10 South Albion
Lowther, Laura Isabel “
Luddington, W. A., Maritime Block
Lusby, John S., 55 Victoria
Lusby, Mrs., J. S. “
Lusby, Augusta, 240 Victoria
Lusby, Aubrey Samuel, Lower Victoria
Manship, Maud, 216 Victoria
Manship, Aramenta Esther, Truemanville
Marney, Edward, 22 South Albion
Marney, Mrs. Edward “
Marney, Harry Edward “
Marney, Claude H. “
Marshall, George, 7 Prince Arthur
Marshall, Mrs. George “
Martin, Clifford L., 35 Rupert
Martin, Mrs. C. L. “
Martin, Hanford, Salem
Martin, Wm.
Martin, Mrs. Lawrence, 167 Pleasant
Marven, Mrs. G. H., 28 Clarence
Maston, Annie May, 7 Mill
Mattinson, Mrs. Effa, 82 Havelock
Mattinson, Flora Jane “
Miles, Mrs. Lewis, Brookdale
Miles, George Arthur “
Miles, Graydon “
Miles, Ernest, 3 Belmont
Miles, Mrs. Ernest, 3 Belmont
Miles, Jennie “
Milner, Robert, 22 Victoria
Milner, Mrs. Robert “
Milner, Maud E. “
Milner, Mrs. Isabel, Lawrence
Milner, Bella Eveline “
Milner, Charles, Pearl Place
Milner, Mrs. Charles “
Miner, Mrs. Harry, 128 Church
Miner, Mrs. Wm, 115 Church
Mitchell, Mrs. John, Russell
Moffatt, James, 72 Church
Moffatt, Mrs. James “
Moffatt, Mrs. J. Eno, 15 Queen
Morris, Glynn Allen, Hickman
Morrison, George M., 42 Havelock
Mumford, Mrs. Louise, 26 Copp Ave.
McArthur, Mrs. Artemas, 27 Havelock
McCully, Mrs. Robert, Victoria
McDonald, Geraldine, 36 Park
McKenzie, Mrs. James A., 66 Victoria
McKenzie, Mrs. C. D., 50 Copp Ave.
McKinnon, Mrs. Wm. Howe, Pearl Place
McLaughlin, Mrs. Blair, 218 Victoria
McLean, Mrs. J. G., 14 Erncliffe
McLean, Pearl Myrtle “
McLean, Donald, Hickman
McLean, Mrs. Donald “
McLennan, Mrs. William, Tidnish Road
McLennan, Mrs. Rolland, 242 Victoria
McLeod, Mrs. John, Centreville
McLeod, James A., Rupert
McLeod, Mrs. J. A., Rupert
McLeod, Olla Elizabeth “
McMillan, Mrs. John, 24 Croft
McMillan, Leona Nellie “
McNair, Mrs. W., Russell
McNaughton, Harry L., 102 Spring
McNaughton, Robert D., Victoria
McNaughton, Percy Wm. “
McNeil, Mrs. Geo. E., 6 Minto
Newcomb, Mrs. Herbert W., East Amherst
Newcomb, Mrs. Hibbert “
Nicholson, Mrs. Leonard, 5 Christie
Noonan, Mrs. Albert, Hastings
O’Neil, Hattie, Pearl Place
Orr, Andrew, Albion
Orr, Mrs. Andrew “
Orr, Georgie “
Page, Abia, 35 Eddy
Page, Laura Evylin “
Palmer, Mrs. Aaron, 58 Eddy
Pangburn, Ludlow Edward
Pangburn, Mrs. L. E.
Parsons, O. H.
Parsons, Mrs. O. H.
Parsons, Rufus, Hastings
Parsons, Mrs. James “
Parsons, Emma J. “
Parsons, Hattie “
Parsons, Mrs., Leicester
Patterson, Mrs. Edward, Davidson
Pipes, John P., 68 Pleasant
Pipes, Herbert S., South Albion
Pipes, Mrs. Herbert S. “
Pipes, Ethel C. “
Pipes, Roy B. “
Pipes, Mrs. E. B., Amherst Point
Pipes, Mrs. Oswald, 10 Agnew
Porter, Hazen, Hastings
Porter, Mrs. Isaac, Hastings
Porter, Florence “
Porteous, Wm. S., 54 Church
Porteous, Mrs. W. S. “
Powell, Mrs. John, 24 Croft
Pride, William E., Prince Arthur
Pride, Mrs. William “
Pridham, Mrs. Carl, 101 Spring
Pugsley, Mrs. Bernia, “
Purdy, Mrs. S. P., 11 Patterson
Purdy, Mary Lower, Victoria
Purdy, Mrs. Charles, Adelaide
Pye, Hedley V., 125 Spring
Pye, Mrs. H. V. “
Ralston, B. W., 196 Victoria
Ralston, Mrs. B. W. “
Ralston, J. Layton, 76 Spring
Ralston, Ivan, 196 Victoria
Read, William M., 58 Church
Read, Mrs. W. M. “
Reid, Mrs. J. Q., 24 Victoria
Reid, Mabel, Violet
Reid, David S., Rupert
Reid, Mrs. D. S. “
Reid, Harry Harding “
Rhodes, Mrs. Nelson A., Robie
Rhyndress, Mamie Ellen, 78 Havelock
Rhyndress, Maggie Bell, 2 Melrose
Ricker, Israel Coleman, Blois Ave
Ricker, Mrs. I. C. “
Robinson, William, Amherst Point
Rockwell, Nathan T., Chamberlain
Rockwell, Mrs. N. T. “
Rockwell, Archibald C. “
Rockwell, Mrs. A. C. “
Rockwell, Vivian G. “
Rockwell, Harold W., 38 Eddy
Rockwell, Mrs. H. W., 38 Eddy
Rockwell, Ella Hastings “
Rogers, Mrs. H. Wyckoff, 33 Rupert
Rogers, Arthur Wyckoff “
Rogers, Norman M. “
Rogers, Dean Richards “
Ross, Mrs. J. Lorne, Ratchford
Rowley, David
Sangster, P. Wellington, 24 South Albion
Sangster, Mrs. P. W. “
Sangster, James A. W.
Sangster, Hiram, Pleasant
Sangster, Mrs. Hiram “
Sawler, Mrs. Lewis
Sawler, Grace
Sawler, Lila
Schnare, Ida, 44 Havelock
Schofield, John
Schurman, Arthur S., 39 Queen
Schurman, Mrs. A. S. “
Schurman, Geneva “
Schurman, Gladys May “
Scott, Daniel, 11 South Albion
Scott, Mrs. Daniel “ “
Scott, Florence
Seaman, John, 63 Spring
Seaman, Mrs. John “
Seaman, James, 11 Belmont
Seaman, Mrs. James “
Secord, George T., 87 Victoria
Secord, Mrs. G. T. “
Sibley, Mrs. Eliza, Duke
Sibley, Martha “
Simmons, Mrs. Walter, Hastings
Simmonds, Stella May, 21 Wellington
Simpson, Mrs. J. A., Lawrence
Simpson, Mrs. Humphrey, 89 Spring
Simpson, Ethel “
Sinclair, Mrs. George, Charles
Slack, Maud, Stanley
Sleep, Mrs. William, 224 Victoria
Sleep, Helen
Smith, G. Botsford, 200 Victoria
Smith, Mrs. G. B. “
Smith, James, Fort Lawrence
Smith, Mrs. James “
Smith, Frank S., 40 Copp
Smith, Mrs. F. S. “
Smith, Mary  “
Snowden, Chipman, Hickman
Snowden, Mrs. Chipman “
Snowden, Lottie Ada “
Stackhouse, Rev. P. J., D. B., 46 Albion
Stackhouse, Mrs. P. J. “
Steele, Rev. D. A., D. D., 37 Rupert
Steele, Mrs. D. A. “
Steeves, Sadie E., Queen
Steeves, Minnie Pearl, Academy
Stewart, James, Amherst Point
Strang, Mrs. Ephraim, 9 Robie
Strang, Wm. B., 17 Ratchford
Stokes, Mrs. A. G., 28 Albion
Stuart, Mrs. John, 13 Hill
Stuart, Annie “
Stuart, Charles S. “
Stultz, Benjamin, 37 Hickman
Thompson, Sanford, East Amherst
Thompson, Mrs. Sanford “
Thompson, Mrs. Herbert, Commerce Building
Thompson, Myrtle A. “
Thompson, Frank Loyd “
Tibbetts, Willard M., Fairview Ave.
Tibbetts, Mrs. W. M. “
Tibbetts, Clara, 35 Rupert
Tingley, M. M., 37 Queen
Tower, Arthur, Maple Ave.
Tower, Mrs. Arth., Maple Ave.
Tower, Wright “ “
Tower, Mrs. Wright “ “
Towse, Mrs. George W., 16 Belmont
Towse, John L. “
Travis, Charles, Hastings
Travis, Mrs. Charles “
Travis, Edward, East Amherst
Travis, Mrs. Gilbert, Brookdale
Travis, Mrs. Ira “
Travis, Mrs. Ner., Hastings
Trenholm, Mrs. Alfred, Fort Lawrence
Trenholm, Mrs. David, 33 Clarence
Troop, Mrs. C. Edward, Lower Victoria
Troop, Wesley “
Troop, Vernon Davis “
Troop, Effie May “
Tuttle, Mrs. John, Salem
Tuttle, Annie “
Vallet, William, Silver
Vergie, Bertram, 14 Patterson
Vergie, Mrs. Bertram “
Vergie, Charles, Beacon
Walters, Mrs. Laura, 9 Robie
Walters, Nettie Pearl “
Weeks, James H., Brookdale
Weeks, Mrs. J. H. “
Weeks, James “
Wells, Walter, East Amherst
Wilkins, Mrs. John, off LaPlanche
Wilson, Mrs. Alexander, 247 Victoria
Wilson, Mrs. Robert “ 10 Prince Arthur
Wood, Maggie, East Amherst
Wood, Mrs. Ralph L., Tyndale Road
York, Fones, Maple Ave.

The following non-resident members are returning to Amherst:
Baxter, Mrs. Trueman 14 South Albion.
Davis, Mrs. Jefferson Salem, N. S.
Hunter, Eva Grace
Hunter, Henry,
Hunter, Mrs. Henry,
Wetherbee, Mrs. Jos., Minto.

Non-Resident Members.

Ackland, Rev. Lemuel, Bridgewater, Mass.
Ackles, Burton, Moncton, N. B.
Acorn, Mrs. Isaac, Vancouver, B.C.
Allen, Edward, Ontario
Allen, Ernest A., Amherst Shore
Allen, George, Cape Tormentine
Allen, Frank, East Delta, B. C.
Allen, Mrs. Andrew, Newtonville, Mass.
Anderson, Lillian C., Jolicure, N. B.
Mrs. Wm. Andres, South Boston
Atkins, Burton Elliott
Atkinson, Mrs. Oran
Babcock, Alma, Milton, Mass.
Babcock, Alton, Milton, Mass.
Babcock, William, Littent, Mass.
Bainbridge, George Arthur, Sackville, N. B.
Baird, Mrs. James, Oxford, N.S.
Barnes, George, Halifax
Baskin, Margaret Edna, Lewiston, Me.
Baskin, Jennie, Lewiston, Me.
Bell, May, Lansing, Mich.
Bell, Harry C., Lansing, Mich,
Belyea, Mrs.
Benjamin, Ola, Montreal
Bent, Mrs. Hibbert, Delta, B.C.
Bent, Mrs. Mariner, Lethbridge, Alta.
Betts, Cora, Calgary, Alta.
Black, LeRoy F., Summerland
Black, Mrs. Frank, Spencer, Iowa
Blair, Olive
Blythe, Mrs. George D., Boston
Boomer, William, Spokane, Wash.
Boomer, Ethel, Spokane, Wash.
Boomer, Lidia, Spokane, Wash.
Boss, George C., Toronto, Ont
Cadman, Herbert, Fort William Ontario
Calder, John, Reston, Man.
Calder, Mrs. John, Reston, Man.
Calder, Margaret
Calder, Nema, Southern States
Calder, Minnie Campbell, Newton, Seattle, Wash.
Campbell, Winnie M., Boston.
Campbell, Hattie, Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey
Carter, Mrs. Church, Minneapolis, Min.
Carter, Mildred, Lacombe, Alta.
Carter, Byron
Carter, Charles Bedford
Cates, F. A., Vancouver
Cates, Mrs. F. A., Vancouver
Chapman, Paul, Vancouver
Chapman, Mrs. Paul “
Chubbuck, Mrs. Maud, Calgary
Coates, William D.
Coates, Mrs. William D.
Coates, Edna L.
Cole, Frank, Bridgetown, N.S.
Cole, Mrs. Frank H. “ “
Cole, Charles
Cole, Mrs. Fred, Sackville, N.B.
Cole, Dora Ella, Lowell, Mass.
Conway, Mrs. M. J., Hampton Station, N.B.
Corkham, Fred
Daniels, Clement
Dashwood, Florence, Chelsea, Mass.
Dent, Jane
Dobson, Mrs. W.A.
Dodge, Mrs. Bayard, Grand Rapids, Mich.
Doncaster, J.A., Vancouver, B.C.
Doncaster, Mrs. J.A., Vancouver B.C.
Durant, Mrs. William
Eaton, Harold, East Boston, Mass.
Eaton, Mrs. Harold, East Boston Mass.
Embree, Mrs. J.W., Cliftondale, Mass.
Embree, Mrs. Ira, Hamilton, Ont.
Estabrooks, Mrs. Harold A.
Fillmore, Oscar
Forbes, Mrs. Nathan
Foster, Ernest, Lynn, Mass.
Fowler, Mrs. William, New York
Fowler, Nellie, Toronto, Ont.
Freeman, Arthur, Jr., Oakland, Cal.
Freeman, Ralph W., St. John, N.B.
Frizzle, William, Philippine Islands
Fullerton, Mrs. Douglas, Point de Bute
Fullerton, Mrs. Allan L., Sackville, N.B.
Furlong, Mrs. Luke, Bradford, Mass.
Gall, Mrs. Alfred, Toronto, Ont.
Gates, Mrs. Augusta A., Cohoes, N.Y.
Gates, Mary Jean, Cohoes, N.Y.
Glennie, Jane, Sackville, N.B.
Goodline, Louisa
Gould, Mary Bell, West Somerville, Mass.
Graham, Mrs. I.D., Eastbourne, Alta.
Graves, Angevina Lucy, Moncton, N.B.
Halfkenny, Herbert A., Bangor, Me.
Halfkenny, Mrs. H. A., Bangor, Me.
Hallet, Greta, Sussex, N.B.
Hamilton Mrs., Annie, Halifax, N.S.
Hanson, Mrs. Christian, Everett, Mass.
Harrison, Amos, Lethbridge, Alta.
Harrison, Mrs. Amos, Lethbridge, Alta.
Harrison, Albert, Maccan, N.S.
Hastings, Carrie, Worcester, Mass.
Hastings, John G., Vancouver, B.C.
Hatfield, Mrs. S. A., Montreal
Hayward, Gilbert, Claresholm, Alta.
Hayward, Mrs., Springhill, N.S.
Hayward, Miss
Heather, J. Elliot, Pugwash Junction, N.S.
Hemming, Mrs.
Hicks, Mrs. Henry, River Hebert, N.S.
Hicks, Annie, Halifax, N. S.
Hicks, May, Sackville, N. B.
Hicks, Frank Lemuel, Middle Sackville, N. B.
Higgs, Mrs. Edward, River Philip, N. S.
Holbrook, Mrs. Walter, Attleboro, Mass.
Holmes, James B.
Hopper, Darius, Roxbury Mass.
Hopper, Mrs. Darius, Roxbury, Mass.
Hopper, Harry, Newport, Kentucky.
Hunt, Mrs. S. J., Halifax, N. S.
Jackson, Maggie, St. John, N.B.
James, Mrs. William, Bermuda
Jamieson, Mrs. Asail, Sunny Brae, N. B.
Jenkins, Mary, Truro
Johnson, Alonzo M., Londonderry, N. S.
Johnson, Mrs. A. M. “
Johnson, Lawrence, Windsor, N. S.
Johnson, Mrs. Lawrence, Windsor, N. S.
Johnson, Stella, Truro, N. S.
Jones, Mrs. William, East Pembroke, Mass,
Jones, Esther Clara, Guybsoro Co.
Keating, Mrs. John C., Moncton, N. B.
Keith, Mrs. J. E., Moncton, N. B.
Keith, Clara B., Moncton, N. B.
Keith, E. Howe, Winnipeg, Man.
Kennedy, Mrs. Charles, Montreal
Kent, Wilkins, Duxbury or Roxbury, Mass.
Kent, Mrs. Lewis, Duxbury or Roxbury, Mass.
Killam, Florence E., Steeves Settlement, N. B.
Langille, Dora Gladys, Winnipeg, Man.
Lauder, Milford E., Vancouver, B. C.
Lauder, Mrs. M. E., Vancouver, B. C.
 Lawson, Mrs. D. C., Moncton, N. B.
Layton, J. Frank, Rochester, N. Y.
Layton, Belle, Middleboro, Mass.
Layton, Mrs. Charles
Leaman, Frank, Vancouver, B. C.
Leithead, Mrs. Alfred, Montreal
Lewis, Lizzie
Lockhart, Mrs. John
Lockhart, Alice
Lockwood, E. M., Mount Whatley
Logan, Mrs. M. A., Paradise, N. S.
Logan, Laura, New York
Logan, Carl, Winnipeg, Man.
Logan, Barry, Lea Valley, B.C.
Long, James W., Sackville, N.B.
Lund, Gordon Powell, Sackville, N. B.
Luther, Mrs. G. D.
Mack, Charles Alexander, Londonderry, N. S.
Martin, Mrs. G. L., New York
Martin, Mrs., Alma, N. B.
Mason, Estella
Mason, Winnie
Maxwell, Claude, Truro, N. S.
Milner, Grace, Lowell, Mass.
Mitton, Archie, Moncton, N.B.
Moody, Mrs. Henry
Mugford, Frederick, Winnipeg, Man.
Mugford, Mrs. Frederick, Winnipeg, Man.
McDonald George A., Moncton N.B.
McDonald, Mrs. George, Halifax, N.S.
McDougall Carl
McFarlane, Mrs. Alonso, Cochrane, Alta.
McFarlane, Jessie Myrtle, Cochrane, Alta.
McFarlane, Herbert E., Cochrane, Alta.
McGill Layton
McIver Ira, Canso, N.S.
McKay Mrs. James, Stoughton, Mass.
McKenzie, Mrs. Lewis, Boston, Mass.
McKim Mrs. Douglas, Trenton, N.S.
McLean Mrs., Montreal
McMann, Mrs. Robert, Halifax N.S.
McPherson Mrs. Robert, McLean Settlement, N.B.
Nelson, Gaius, Springhill, N.S.
Nelson, Mrs. Gaius, Springhill, N.S.
Norton, Mrs. N.A., Martha’s Vineyard, Mass.
O’Neil, Mrs. William E., Parrsboro.
O’Rouke, Mrs. Amos, Springhill, N.S.
Page, Mrs. Frank, San Francisco, Cal.
Patterson, Dr. William, Forrest Hill, Boston, Mass.
Peloton, E.C., Penticton, B.C.
Perry, LeRoy O.
Perry, Mrs. LeRoy
Perry, Vaughan I., Sydney, C.B.
Perry, Ivan
Phalen, Mrs. Ann, Moncton, N.B
Phalen, Roy, Boston, Mass.
Pinder, Miss, England
Pipes, Lida, Boston, Mass.
Pool, Mrs. H.C., Pugwash River, N.S.
Porter, W. Jasper, West Lynn, Mass.
Porter, Harris
Powell, Mrs. Seymour, Painsac, N.B.
Pugsley, Mrs. Clarence, Barronsfield, N.S.
Purdy, Mrs. Percy, Regina, Sask.
Quigley, Freeman D., British Columbia
Read, Ellen, Sackville, N.B.
Ricker, Morris G.
Ripley, Mrs. Robert, Chignecto, N.S.
Robinson, Mrs. Mariner
Robertson, E.F., Edmonton, Alta.
Rockwell, Frederick, Halifax, N.S.
Rockwell, Ira C., St. John, N.B.
Rogers, Charles, Atlanta, Georgia
Rogers, Mrs. Mary Eliza, St. John, N.B.
Rogerson, Robert, Guysboro Co.
Sands, Mrs. J. E. R., Pictou, N.S.
Sawlor, Lewis, Etimona, Sask.
Scribner, R. W., Petticodiac, N.B.
Scribner, Mrs. R.W., Petticodiac, N.B.
Scribner, Robert M. Jr., Painsac Junction, N.B.
Shupe, Robert, Westville, N.S.
Simpson, Ella Gertrude, Saskatoon, Sask.
Sleep, Wilbur
Smith, Mrs. Frank, New Westminster, B.C.
Tait, Gordon Harold, East Boston, Mass.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONE HUNDRED YEARS WITH THE BAPTISTS OF AMHERST, N.S., 1810 TO 1910 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


