The Project Gutenberg eBook of The works of Thomas Middleton, Volume 2 (of 5)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The works of Thomas Middleton, Volume 2 (of 5)

Author: Thomas Middleton
        Thomas Dekker
        William Rowley

Editor: Alexander Dyce

Release date: March 31, 2025 [eBook #75604]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Edward Lumley, 1840

Credits: Tim Lindell, KD Weeks, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF THOMAS MIDDLETON, VOLUME 2 (OF 5) ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been gathered at end of the text.

In Volume 1 of this work, the editor provided a section of ‘Addendum and
Corrigiendum’, with errata of the following volumes, include this one.
The errata for Volume 2 have been copied from that volume for
straightfoward reference, and are included in the transcribers’s
endnotes.

Stage directions, except for entrances, can be:

 in-line
            in the middle of a line and delimited with ‘[ ]’,

 end of line
            right-justified on the same line where there is room, with
              only the leading ‘[’,

 next line
            right-justified on the following line, where there is
              insufficent room, with a hanging indent.

The same convention is followed here. Since this version is somewhat
wider than the original, most directions are on the same line as the
speech.

Entrances were centered and separated slightly from lines above and
below. This is rendered here as a full blank line.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

                               THE WORKS
                                   OF
                           THOMAS MIDDLETON.

                             --------------

                                VOL. II.

                               CONTAINING


                      A TRICK TO CATCH THE OLD ONE.
                      THE FAMILY OF LOVE.
                      YOUR FIVE GALLANTS.
                      A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS.
                      THE ROARING GIRL.




                                LONDON:

                PRINTED BY ROBSON, LEVEY, AND FRANKLYN,
                         46 St. Martin’s Lane.

                               THE WORKS

                                   OF

                           THOMAS MIDDLETON,

                     =Now first collected,=

                                  WITH

                      SOME ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR,

                                  AND

                                 NOTES,

                                   BY

                      THE REVEREND ALEXANDER DYCE.










                           _IN FIVE VOLUMES._

                                VOL. II.

                             --------------

                                LONDON:

                     EDWARD LUMLEY, CHANCERY LANE.

                                  ---

                                 1840.

                             --------------

                                A TRICK
                         TO CATCH THE OLD ONE.




_A Tricke to Catch the Old-one. As it hath beene often in Action, both
at Paules, and the Black-Fryers. Presented before his Maiestie on
New-yeares night last. Composde by T. M. At London Printed by G: E. and
are to be sold by Henry Rockytt, at the long shop in the Poultrie vnder
the Dyall._ 1608. 4to. Second ed., 1616. 4to.


This drama (which Langbaine not undeservedly calls “excellent”) is
reprinted in the 5th vol. of _A Continuation of Dodsley’s Old Plays_,
1816.

_A Trick to catch the Old One_ was licensed by Sir George Bucke, 7th
Oct. 1607: see Chalmers’s _Suppl. Apol._ p. 201.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.


  WITGOOD.
  LUCRE, _his uncle_.
  HOARD.
  ONESIPHORUS HOARD, _his brother_.
  LIMBER,    }
  KIX,[1]    }
  LAMPREY,   } _friends of_ HOARD.
  SPICHCOCK, }
  DAMPIT.
  GULF.
  FREEDOM, _son to_ MISTRESS LUCRE.
  MONEYLOVE.
  _Host._
  SIR LAUNCELOT.
  _Creditors._
  _Gentlemen._
  GEORGE.
  _Drawer._
  _Boy._
  _Scrivener._
  _Servants, &c._

  _Courtesan._
  MISTRESS LUCRE.
  JOYCE, _niece to_ HOARD.
  LADY FOXSTONE.
  AUDREY, _servant to_ DAMPIT.


         SCENE (except during the first two scenes of act i.),
                                LONDON.




                                A TRICK
                         TO CATCH THE OLD ONE.

                             --------------


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


                     _A Street in a Country Town._

                            _Enter_ WITGOOD.

          WIT. All’s gone! still thou’rt a gentleman, that’s all;
        but a poor one, that’s nothing. What milk bring[2] thy
        meadows forth now? where are thy goodly uplands, and thy
        down lands? all sunk into that little pit, lechery.
        Why should a gallant pay but two shillings for his
        ordinary[3] that nourishes him, and twenty times two
        for his brothel[4] that consumes him? But where’s
        Long-acre?[5] in my uncle’s conscience, which is
        three years’ voyage about: he that sets out upon his
        conscience ne’er finds the way home again; he is either
        swallowed in the quicksands of law-quillets, or
        splits upon the piles of a _præmunire_; yet these old
        fox-brained and ox-browed uncles have still defences for
        their avarice, and apologies for their practices, and
        will thus greet our follies:

                    _He that doth his youth expose
                      To brothel, drink, and danger,
                    Let him that is his nearest kin
                      Cheat him before a stranger:_

        and that’s his uncle; ’tis a principle in usury. I dare
        not visit the city: there I should be too soon visited
        by that horrible plague, my debts; and by that means I
        lose a virgin’s love, her portion, and her virtues.
        Well, how should a man live now that has no living?
        hum,—why, are there not a million of men in the world
        that only sojourn upon their brain, and make their wits
        their mercers; and am I but one amongst that million,
        and cannot thrive upon’t? Any trick out of the compass
        of law[6] now would come happily to me.

                           _Enter Courtesan._

          COUR. My love!
          WIT. My loathing! hast thou been the secret consumption
        of my purse, and now comest to undo my last means, my
        wits? wilt leave no virtue in me, and yet thou ne’er the
        better?
        Hence, courtesan, round-webb’d tarantula,
        That dry’st the roses in the cheeks of youth!
          COUR. I’ve[7] been true unto your pleasure; and all
             your lands
        Thrice rack’d, were[8] never worth the jewel which
        I prodigally gave you, my virginity:
        Lands mortgag’d may return, and more esteem’d,
        But honesty once pawn’d, is ne’er redeem’d.
          WIT. Forgive: I do thee wrong
        To make thee sin, and then to chide thee for’t.
          COUR. I know I am your loathing now; farewell.
          WIT. Stay, best invention, stay.
          COUR. I that _have been the secret consumption of your
        purse_, shall I stay now _to undo your last means, your
        wits? hence, courtesan, away!_
          WIT. I prithee, make me not mad at my own weapon: stay
        (a thing few women can do, I know that, and therefore
        they had need wear stays), be not contrary: dost love
        me? Fate[9] has so cast it that all my means I must
        derive from thee.
          COUR. From me? be happy then;
        What lies within the power of my performance
        Shall be commanded of thee.
          WIT. Spoke like
        An honest drab, i’faith: it may prove something;
        What trick is not an embryon at first,
        Until a perfect shape come over it?
          COUR. Come,[10] I must help you: whereabouts left you?
        I’ll proceed:
        Though you beget, ’tis I must help to breed.
        Speak, what is’t? I’d fain conceive it.
          WIT. So, so, so: thou shalt presently take the name and
        form upon thee of a rich country widow, four hundred
        a-year valiant,[11] in woods, in bullocks, in barns, and
        in rye-stacks; we’ll to London, and to my covetous
        uncle.
          COUR. I begin to applaud thee; our states being both
        desperate, they are soon resolute: but how for horses?
          WIT. Mass, that’s true; the jest will be of some
        continuance. Let me see; horses now, a bots on ’em!
        Stay, I have acquaintance with a mad host, never yet
        bawd to thee; I have rinsed the whoreson’s gums in
        mull-sack many a time and often: put but a good tale
        into his ear now, so it come off cleanly, and there’s
        horse and man for us, I dare warrant thee.
          COUR. Arm your wits then
        Speedily; there shall want nothing in me,
        Either in behaviour, discourse, or fashion,
        That shall discredit your intended purpose.
        I will so artfully disguise my wants,
        And set so good a courage on my state,
        That I will be believ’d.
          WIT. Why, then, all’s furnished.[12] I shall go nigh to
        catch that old fox mine uncle: though he make but some
        amends for my undoing, yet there’s some comfort in’t, he
        cannot otherwise choose (though it be but in hope to
        cozen me again) but supply any hasty want that I bring
        to town with me. The device well and cunningly carried,
        the name of a rich widow, and four hundred a-year in
        good earth, will so conjure up a kind of usurer’s love
        in him to me, that he will not only desire my presence,—
        which at first shall scarce be granted him, I’ll keep
        off a’ purpose,—but I shall find him so officious to
        deserve, so ready to supply! I know the state of an old
        man’s affection so well: if his nephew be poor indeed,
        why, he lets God alone with him; but if he be once rich,
        then he’ll be the first man that helps him.
          COUR. ’Tis right the world; for, in these days, an old
        man’s love to his kindred is like his kindness to his
        wife, ’tis always done before he comes at it.
          WIT. I owe thee for that jest. Begone: here’s all my
        wealth; prepare thyself, away. I’ll to mine host with
        all possible haste; and with the best art, and most
        profitable form, pour the sweet circumstance into his
        ear, which shall have the gift to turn all the wax to
        honey. [_Exit Courtesan._]—How no[w]? O, the right
        worshipful seniors of our country!

           _Enter_ ONESIPHORUS HOARD, LIMBER, _and_ KIX.[13]

          ONES. H. Who’s that?
          LIM. O, the common rioter; take no note of him.
          WIT. You will not see me now; the comfort is,
        Ere it be long you will scarce see yourselves.
                                                    [_Aside; and exit._
          ONES. H. I wonder how he breathes; has consum’d all
        Upon that courtesan.
          LIM. We have heard so much.
          ONES. H. You’ve[14] heard all truth. His uncle and my
             brother
        Have been these three years mortal adversaries:
        Two old tough spirits, they seldom meet but fight,
        Or quarrel when ’tis calmest:
        I think their anger be the very fire
        That keeps their age alive.
          LIM. What was the quarrel, sir?
          ONES. H. Faith, about a purchase, fetching over a young
        heir. Master Hoard, my brother, having wasted much time
        in beating the bargain, what did me old Lucre, but as
        his conscience moved him, knowing the poor gentleman,
        stept in between ’em, and cozened him himself.
          LIM. And was this all, sir?
          ONES. H. This was e’en it, sir; yet, for all this, I
        know no reason but the match might go forward betwixt
        his wife’s son and my niece: what though there be a
        dissension between the two old men, I see no reason it
        should put a difference between the two younger; ’tis as
        natural for old folks to fall out, as for young to fall
        in. A scholar comes a-wooing to my niece; well, he’s
        wise, but he’s poor: her son comes a-wooing to my niece;
        well, he’s a fool, but he’s rich.
          LIM. Ay, marry, sir.
          ONES. H. Pray, now, is not a rich fool better than a
        poor philosopher?
          LIM. One would think so, i’faith.
          ONES. H. She now remains at London with my brother, her
        second uncle, to learn fashions, practise music; the
        voice between her lips, and the viol[15] between her
        legs, she’ll be fit for a consort very speedily: a
        thousand good pound is her portion; if she marry, we’ll
        ride up and be merry.
          KIX. A match, if it be a match.            [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                   _Another Street in the same Town._

                    _Enter_ WITGOOD, _meeting Host_.

          WIT. Mine host!
          HOST. Young master Witgood!
          WIT. I have been laying[16] all the town for thee.
          HOST. Why, what’s the news, bully Had-land?
          WIT. What geldings are in the house, of thine own?
        answer me to that first.
          HOST. Why, man, why?
          WIT. Mark me what I say: I’ll tell thee such a tale in
        thine ear, that thou shalt trust me spite of thy teeth,
        furnish me with some money wille nille, and ride up with
        me thyself _contra voluntatem et professionem_.
          HOST. How? let me see this trick, and I’ll say thou hast
        more art than a conjurer.
          WIT. Dost thou joy in my advancement?
          HOST. Do I love sack and ginger?
          WIT. Comes my prosperity desiredly to thee?
          HOST. Come forfeitures to a usurer, fees to an officer,
        punks to an host, and pigs to a parson desiredly? why,
        then, la.
          WIT. Will the report of a widow of four hundred a-year,
        boy, make thee leap, and sing, and dance, and come to
        thy place again?
          HOST. Wilt thou command me now? I am thy spirit; conjure
        me into any shape.
          WIT. I ha’ brought her from her friends, turned back
        the horses by a slight;[17] not so much as one among
        her six men, goodly large yeomanly fellows, will she
        trust with this her purpose: by this light, all
        unmanned, regardless of her state, neglectful of
        vain-glorious ceremony, all for my love. O, ’tis a
        fine little voluble tongue, mine host, that wins a
        widow!
          HOST. No, ’tis a tongue with a great T, my boy, that
        wins a widow.
          WIT. Now, sir, the case stands thus: good mine host, if
        thou lovest my happiness, assist me.
          HOST. Command all my beasts i’ th’ house.
          WIT. Nay, that’s not all neither: prithee, take truce
        with thy joy, and listen to me. Thou knowest I have a
        wealthy uncle i’ th’ city, somewhat the wealthier by my
        follies: the report of this fortune, well and cunningly
        carried, might be a means to draw some goodness from the
        usuring rascal; for I have put her in hope already of
        some estate that I have either in land or money: now, if
        I be found true in neither, what may I expect but a
        sudden breach of our love, utter dissolution of the
        match, and confusion of my fortunes for ever?
          HOST. Wilt thou but trust the managing of thy business
        with me?
          WIT. With thee? why, will I desire to thrive in my
        purpose? will I hug four hundred a-year, I that know the
        misery of nothing? Will that man wish a rich widow, that
        has ne’er a hole to put his head in? With thee, mine
        host? why, believe it, sooner with thee than with a
        covey of counsellors.
          HOST. Thank you for your good report, i’faith, sir; and
        if I stand you not in stead, why then let an host come
        off _hic et hæc hostis_, a deadly enemy to dice, drink,
        and venery. Come, where’s this widow?
          WIT. Hard at Park-end.
          HOST. I’ll be her serving-man for once.
          WIT. Why, there we let off together: keep full time; my
        thoughts were striking then just the same number.
          HOST. I knew’t: shall we then see our merry days again?
          WIT. Our merry nights—which ne’er shall be more seen.
           [_Aside._]
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                            _A Street._[18]

          _Enter_[19] LUCRE _and_ HOARD _quarrelling_; LAMPREY,
              SPICHCOCK, FREEDOM, _and_ MONEYLOVE, _coming
              between to pacify them_.

          LAM. Nay, good master Lucre, and you, master Hoard,
        anger is the wind which you’re both too much troubled
        withal.
          HOA. Shall my adversary thus daily affront[20] me,
        ripping up the old wound of our malice, which three
        summers could not close up? into which wound the very
        sight of him drops scalding lead instead of balsamum.
          LUC. Why, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard! may I not
        pass in the state of quietness to mine own house? answer
        me to that, before witness, and why? I’ll refer the
        cause to honest, even-minded gentlemen, or require the
        mere indifferences of the law to decide this matter. I
        got the purchase, true: was’t not any man’s case? yes:
        will a wise man stand as a bawd, whilst another wipes
        his nose[21] of the bargain? no; I answer no in that
        case.
          LAM. Nay, sweet master Lucre.
          HOA. Was it the part of a friend—no, rather of a Jew;—
        mark what I say—when I had beaten the bush to the last
        bird, or, as I may term it, the price to a pound, then,
        like a cunning usurer, to come in the evening of the
        bargain, and glean all my hopes in a minute? to enter,
        as it were, at the back door of the purchase? for thou
        ne’er camest the right way by it.
          LUC. Hast thou the conscience to tell me so without any
        impeachment to thyself?
          HOA. Thou that canst defeat thy own nephew, Lucre,
        lap his lands into bonds, and take the extremity of
        thy kindred’s forfeitures, because he’s a rioter, a
        wastethrift, a brothel-master,[22] and so forth;
        what may a stranger expect from thee but _vulnera
        dilacerata_, as the poet says, dilacerate dealing?
          LUC. Upbraidest thou me with nephew? is all imputation
        laid upon me? what acquaintance have I with his follies?
        if he riot, ’tis he must want it; if he surfeit, ’tis he
        must feel it; if he drab it, ’tis he must lie by’t:
        what’s this to me?
          HOA. What’s all to thee? nothing, nothing; such is the
        gulf of thy desire and the wolf of thy conscience: but
        be assured, old Pecunius[23] Lucre, if ever fortune so
        bless me, that I may be at leisure to vex thee, or any
        means so favour me, that I may have opportunity to mad
        thee, I will pursue it with that flame of hate, that
        spirit of malice, unrepressed wrath, that I will blast
        thy comforts.
          LUC. Ha, ha, ha!
          LAM. Nay, master Hoard, you’re a wise gentleman——
          HOA. I will so cross thee——
          LUC. And I thee.
          HOA. So without mercy fret thee——
          LUC. So monstrously oppose thee——
          HOA. Dost scoff at my just anger? O, that I had as much
        power as usury has over thee!
          LUC. Then thou wouldst have as much power as the devil
        has over thee.
          HOA. Toad!
          LUC. Aspic!
          HOA. Serpent!
          LUC. Viper!
          SPI. Nay, gentlemen, then we must divide you perforce.
          LAM. When the fire grows too unreasonable hot, there’s
        no better way than to take off the wood.

          [_Exeunt_ LAMPREY _and_ SPICHCOCK, _drawing off_ LUCRE
                _and_ HOARD _different ways: manent_[24] FREEDOM
                _and_ MONEYLOVE.

          FREE. A word, good signior.
          MON. How now, what’s the news?
          FREE. ’Tis given me to understand that you are a rival
        of mine in the love of mistress Joyce, master Hoard’s
        niece: say me ay, say me no?
          MON. Yes, ’tis so.
          FREE. Then look to yourself, you cannot live long: I’m
        practising every morning; a month hence I’ll challenge
        you.
          MON. Give me your hand upon’t; there’s my pledge I’ll
        meet you.                     [_Strikes him, and exit._
          FREE. O, O! what reason had you for that, sir, to strike
        before the month? you knew I was not ready for you, and
        that made you so crank:[25] I am not such a coward to
        strike again, I warrant you. My ear has the law of her
        side, for it burns horribly. I will teach him to strike
        a naked face, the longest day of his life: ’slid, it
        shall cost me some money but I’ll bring this box into
        the chancery.                                  [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                           _Another Street._

                      _Enter_ WITGOOD _and Host_.

          HOST. Fear you nothing, sir; I have lodged her in a
        house of credit, I warrant you.
          WIT. Hast thou the writings?
          HOST. Firm, sir.
          WIT. Prithee, stay, and behold two the most prodigious
        rascals that ever slipt into the shape of men; Dampit,
        sirrah, and young Gulf his fellow-caterpillar.
          HOST. Dampit? sure I have heard of that Dampit?
          WIT. Heard of him? why, man, he that has lost both his
        ears may hear of him; a famous infamous trampler of
        time; his own phrase. Note him well: that Dampit,
        sirrah, he in the uneven beard and the serge cloak, is
        the most notorious, usuring, blasphemous, atheistical,
        brothel-vomiting rascal, that we have in these latter
        times now extant; whose first beginning was the stealing
        of a masty[26] dog from a farmer’s house.
          HOST. He looked as if he would obey the commandment[s]
        well, when he began first with stealing.
          WIT. True: the next town he came at, he set the dogs
        together by th’ ears.
          HOST. A sign he should follow the law, by my faith.
          WIT. So it followed, indeed; and being destitute of all
        fortunes, staked his masty against a noble,[27] and by
        great fortune his dog had the day: how he made it up ten
        shillings, I know not; but his own boast is, that he
        came to town but with ten shillings in his purse, and
        now is credibly worth ten thousand pound.
          HOST. How the devil came he by it?

                       _Enter_ DAMPIT _and_ GULF.

          WIT. How the devil came he not by it? If you put in the
        devil once, riches come with a vengeance: has been a
        trampler of the law,[28] sir; and the devil has a care
        of his footmen. The rogue has spied me now; he nibbled
        me finely once, too:—a pox search you! [_Aside._]—O,
        master Dampit!—the very loins of thee! [_Aside._]—Cry
        you mercy, master Gulf; you walk so low, I promise you I
        saw you not, sir.
          GULF. He that walks low walks safe, the poets tell us.
          WIT. And nigher hell by a foot and a half than the
             rest of his fellows.—                     [_Aside._
        But, my old Harry!
          DAM. My sweet Theodorus!
          WIT. ’Twas a merry world when thou camest to town with
        ten shillings in thy purse.
          DAM. And now worth ten thousand pound, my boy. Report
        it; Harry Dampit, a trampler of time, say, he would be
        up in a morning, and be here with his serge gown, dashed
        up to the hams in a cause; have his feet stink about
        Westminster Hall, and come home again; see the galleons,
        the galleasses,[29] the great armadas of the law; then
        there be hoys and petty vessels, oars and scullers of
        the time; there be picklocks of the time too; then would
        I be here; I would trample up and down like a mule: now
        to the judges, _May it please your reverend honourable
        fatherhoods_; then to my counsellor, _May it please your
        worshipful patience_; then to the examiner’s office,
        _May it please your mastership’s gentleness_; then to
        one of the clerks, _May it please your worshipful
        lousiness_,—for I find him scrubbing in his cod-piece;
        then to the hall again, then to the chamber again——
          WIT. And when to the cellar again?
          DAM. E’en when thou wilt again: tramplers of time,
        motions of Fleet Street, and visions of Holborn;[30]
        here I have fees of one, there I have fees of another;
        my clients come about me, the fooliaminy and coxcombry
        of the country: I still trashed[31] and trotted for
        other men’s causes; thus was poor Harry Dampit made rich
        by others’ laziness, who, though they would not follow
        their own suits, I made ’em follow me with their purses.
          WIT. Didst thou so, old Harry?
          DAM. Ay, and I soused ’em with bills of charges,
        i’faith; twenty pound a-year have I brought in for
        boat-hire, and I ne’er stept into boat in my life.
          WIT. Tramplers of time!
          DAM. Ay, tramplers of time, rascals of time,
        bull-beggars![32]
          WIT. Ah, thou’rt a mad old Harry!—Kind master Gulf, I am
        bold to renew my acquaintance.
          GULF. I embrace it, sir.                    [_Exeunt._


                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                      _A Room in_ LUCRE’S _House_.

                             _Enter_ LUCRE.

          LUC. My adversary evermore twits me with my nephew,
        forsooth, my nephew: why may not a virtuous uncle have a
        dissolute nephew? What though he be a brotheller, a
        wastethrift, a common surfeiter, and, to conclude, a
        beggar, must sin in him call up shame in me? Since we
        have no part in their follies, why should we have part
        in their infamies? For my strict hand toward his
        mortgage, that I deny not: I confess I had an uncle’s
        pen’worth; let me see, half in half, true: I saw neither
        hope of his reclaiming, nor comfort in his being; and
        was it not then better bestowed upon his uncle than upon
        one of his aunts?—I need not say bawd, for every one
        knows what aunt stands for in the last translation.

                            _Enter Servant._

        Now, sir?
          SER. There’s a country serving-man, sir, attends to
        speak with your worship.
          LUC. I’m at best leisure now; send him in to me.
                                               [_Exit Servant._

                _Enter Host disguised as a serving-man._

          HOST. Bless your venerable worship.
          LUC. Welcome, good fellow.
          HOST. He calls me thief[33] at first sight, yet he
        little thinks I am an host.                   [_Aside._
          LUC. What’s thy business with me?
          HOST. Faith, sir, I am sent from my mistress, to any
        sufficient gentleman indeed, to ask advice upon a
        doubtful point: ’tis indifferent, sir, to whom I come,
        for I know none, nor did my mistress direct me to any
        particular man, for she’s as mere a stranger here as
        myself; only I found your worship within, and ’tis a
        thing I ever loved, sir, to be despatched as soon as I
        can.
          LUC. A good, blunt honesty; I like him well. [_Aside._]—
        What is thy mistress?
          HOST. Faith, a country gentlewoman, and a widow, sir.
        Yesterday was the first flight of us; but now she
        intends to stay till a little term business be ended.
          LUC. Her name, I prithee?
          HOST. It runs there in the writings, sir, among her
        lands; widow Medler.
          LUC. Medler? mass, have I ne’er heard of that widow?
          HOST. Yes, I warrant you, have you, sir: not the rich
        widow in Staffordshire?
          LUC. Cuds me, there ’tis indeed; thou hast put me into
        memory: there’s a widow indeed! ah, that I were a
        bachelor again!
          HOST. No doubt your worship might do much then; but
        she’s fairly promised to a bachelor already.
          LUC. Ah, what is he, I prithee?
          HOST. A country gentleman too; one whom your worship
        knows not, I’m sure; has spent some few follies in his
        youth, but marriage, by my faith, begins to call him
        home: my mistress loves him, sir, and love covers
        faults, you know: one master Witgood, if ever you have
        heard of the gentleman.
          LUC. Ha! Witgood, sayst thou?
          HOST. That’s his name indeed, sir; my mistress is like
        to bring him to a goodly seat yonder; four hundred
        a-year, by my faith.
          LUC. But, I pray, take me with you.[34]
          HOST. Ay, sir.
          LUC. What countryman might this young Witgood be?
          HOST. A Leicestershire gentleman, sir.
          LUC. My nephew, by th’ mass, my nephew! I’ll fetch out
        more of this, i’faith: a simple country fellow, I’ll
        work’t out of him. [_Aside._]—And is that gentleman,
        sayst thou, presently to marry her?
          HOST. Faith, he brought her up to town, sir; has the
        best card in all the bunch for’t, her heart; and I know
        my mistress will be married ere she go down; nay, I’ll
        swear that, for she’s none of those widows that will go
        down first, and be married after; she hates that, I can
        tell you, sir.
          LUC. By my faith, sir, she is like to have a proper
        gentleman, and a comely; I’ll give her that gift.
          HOST. Why, does your worship know him, sir?
          LUC. I know him? does not all the world know him? can a
        man of such exquisite qualities be hid under a bushel?
          HOST. Then your worship may save me a labour, for I had
        charge given me to inquire after him.
          LUC. Inquire of him? If I might counsel thee, thou
        shouldst ne’er trouble thyself further; inquire of him
        of no more but of me; I’ll fit thee. I grant he has been
        youthful; but is he not now reclaimed? mark you that,
        sir: has not your mistress, think you, been wanton in
        her youth? if men be wags, are there not women wagtails?
          HOST. No doubt, sir.
          LUC. Does not he return wisest that comes home whipt
        with his own follies?
          HOST. Why, very true, sir.
          LUC. The worst report you can hear of him, I can tell
        you, is that he has been a kind gentleman, a liberal,
        and a worthy: who but lusty Witgood, thrice-noble
        Witgood!
          HOST. Since your worship has so much knowledge in him,
        can you resolve[35] me, sir, what his living might be?
        my duty binds me, sir, to have a care of my mistress’
        estate; she has been ever a good mistress to me, though
        I say it: many wealthy suitors has she nonsuited for his
        sake; yet though her love be so fixed, a man cannot tell
        whether his non-performance may help to remove it, sir:
        he makes us believe he has lands and living.
          LUC. Who, young master Witgood? why, believe it, he has
        as goodly a fine living out yonder,—what do you call the
        place?
          HOST. Nay, I know not, i’faith.
          LUC. Hum—see, like a beast, if I have not forgot the
        name—pooh! and out yonder again, goodly grown woods and
        fair meadows: pax[36] on’t, I can ne’er hit of that
        place neither: he? why, he’s Witgood of Witgood Hall;
        he, an unknown thing!
          HOST. Is he so, sir? To see how rumour will alter! trust
        me, sir, we heard once he had no lands, but all lay
        mortgaged to an uncle he has in town here.
          LUC. Push,[37] ’tis a tale, ’tis a tale.
          HOST. I can assure you, sir, ’twas credibly reported to
        my mistress.
          LUC. Why, do you think, i’faith, he was ever so simple
        to mortgage his lands to his uncle? or his uncle so
        unnatural to take the extremity of such a mortgage?
          HOST. That was my saying still, sir.
          LUC. Pooh, ne’er think it.
          HOST. Yet that report goes current.
          LUC. Nay, then you urge me: Cannot I tell that best that
        am his uncle?
          HOST. How, sir? what have I done!
          LUC. Why, how now! in a swoon, man?
          HOST. Is your worship his uncle, sir?
          LUC. Can that be any harm to you, sir?
          HOST. I do beseech you, sir, do me the favour to conceal
        it: what a beast was I to utter so much! pray, sir, do
        me the kindness to keep it in; I shall have my coat
        pulled o’er my ears, an’t should be known; for the truth
        is, an’t please your worship, to prevent much rumour and
        many suitors, they intend to be married very suddenly
        and privately.
          LUC. And dost thou think it stands with my judgment to
        do them injury? must I needs say the knowledge of this
        marriage comes from thee? am I a fool at fifty-four? do
        I lack subtlety now, that have got all my wealth by it?
        There’s a leash of angels[38] for thee: come, let me woo
        thee speak where lie they?
          HOST. So I might have no anger, sir——
          LUC. Passion of me, not a jot: prithee, come.
          HOST. I would not have it known, sir,[39] it came by my
        means.
          LUC. Why, am I a man of wisdom?
          HOST. I dare trust your worship, sir; but I’m a stranger
        to your house; and to avoid all intelligencers, I desire
        your worship’s ear.
          LUC. This fellow’s worth a matter of trust. [_Aside._]—
        Come, sir. [_Host whispers to him._] Why, now thou’rt an
        honest lad.—Ah, sirrah, nephew!
          HOST. Please you, sir, now I have begun with your
        worship, when shall I attend for your advice upon that
        doubtful point? I must come warily now.
          LUC. Tut, fear thou nothing; To-morrow’s evening shall
        resolve the doubt.
          HOST. The time shall cause my attendance.
          LUC. Fare thee well. [_Exit Host._]—There’s more true
        honesty in such a country serving-man than in a hundred
        of our cloak companions:[40] I may well call ’em
        companions, for since blue coats have been turned into
        cloaks,[41] we can scarce know the man from the master.—
        George!

                            _Enter_ GEORGE.

          GEO. Anon, sir.
          LUC. List hither: [_whispers_] keep the place secret:
        commend me to my nephew; I know no cause, tell him, but
        he might see his uncle.
          GEO. I will, sir.
          LUC. And, do you hear, sir? Take heed you use him with
        respect and duty.
          GEO. Here’s a strange alteration; one day he must be
        turned out like a beggar, and now he must be called in
        like a knight. [_Aside, and exit._
          LUC. Ah, sirrah, that rich widow!—four hundred a-year!
        beside, I hear she lays claim to a title of a hundred
        more. This falls unhappily that he should bear a grudge
        to me now, being likely to prove so rich: what is’t,
        trow,[42] that he makes me a stranger for? Hum,—I hope
        he has not so much wit to apprehend that I cozened him:
        he deceives me then. Good heaven, who would have thought
        it would ever have come to this pass! yet he’s a proper
        gentleman, i’faith, give him his due, marry, that’s his
        mortgage; but that I ne’er mean to give him: I’ll make
        him rich enough in words, if that be good; and if it
        come to a piece of money, I will not greatly stick
        for’t; there may be hope some of the widow’s lands, too,
        may one day fall upon me, if things be carried wisely.

                           _Re-enter_ GEORGE.

          Now, sir, where is he?
          GEO. He desires your worship to hold him excused; he has
        such weighty business, it commands him wholly from all
        men.
          LUC. Were those my nephew’s words?
          GEO. Yes, indeed, sir.
          LUC. When men grow rich, they grow proud too, I perceive
        that; he would not have sent me such an answer once
        within this twelvemonth: see what ’tis when a man’s come
        to his lands! [_Aside._]—Return to him again, sir; tell
        him his uncle desires his company for an hour; I’ll
        trouble him but an hour, say; ’tis for his own good,
        tell him: and, do you hear, sir? put _worship_ upon him:
        go to, do as I bid you; he’s like to be a gentleman of
        worship very shortly.
          GEO. This is good sport, i’faith.  [_Aside, and exit._
          LUC. Troth, he uses his uncle discourteously now: can he
        tell what I may do for him? goodness may come from me in
        a minute, that comes not in seven year again: he knows
        my humour; I am not so usually good; ’tis no small thing
        that draws kindness from me, he may know that and[43] he
        will. The chief cause that invites me to do him most
        good, is the sudden astonishing of old Hoard, my
        adversary: how pale his malice will look at my nephew’s
        advancement! with what a dejected spirit he will behold
        his fortunes, whom but last day he proclaimed rioter,
        penurious makeshift, despised brothel-master![44] Ha,
        ha! ’twill do me more secret joy than my last purchase,
        more precious comfort than all these widow’s revenues.

                _Re-enter_ GEORGE, _shewing in_ WITGOOD.

        Now, sir?
          GEO. With much entreaty he’s at length come, sir.
                                                       [_Exit._
          LUC. O, nephew, let me salute you, sir! you’re welcome,
        nephew.
          WIT. Uncle, I thank you.
          LUC. You’ve a fault, nephew; you’re a stranger here:
        Well, heaven give you joy!
          WIT. Of what, sir?
          LUC. Hah, we can hear!
        You might have known your uncle’s house, i’faith,
        You and your widow: go to, you were to blame;
        If I may tell you so without offence.
          WIT. How could you hear of that, sir?
          LUC. O, pardon me!
        ’Twas[45] your will to have kept it[46] from me, I
           perceive now.
          WIT. Not for any defect of love, I protest, uncle.
          LUC. O, ’twas unkindness, nephew! fie, fie, fie.
          WIT. I am sorry you take it in that sense, sir.
          LUC. Pooh, you cannot colour it, i’faith, nephew.

          WIT. Will you but hear what I can say in my just excuse,
        sir?
          LUC. Yes, faith, will I, and welcome.
          WIT. You that know my danger i’ th’ city, sir, so well,
        how great my debts are, and how extreme my creditors,
        could not out of your pure judgment, sir, have wished us
        hither.
          LUC. Mass, a firm reason indeed.
          WIT. Else, my uncle’s house! why, ’t had been the only
        make-match.
          LUC. Nay, and thy credit.
          WIT. My credit? nay, my countenance: push,[47] nay, I
        know, uncle, you would have wrought it so by your wit,
        you would have made her believe in time the whole house
        had been mine.
          LUC. Ay, and most of the goods too.
          WIT. La, you there! well, let ’em all prate what they
        will, there’s nothing like the bringing of a widow to
        one’s uncle’s house.
          LUC. Nay, let nephews be ruled as they list, they shall
        find their uncle’s house the most natural place when
        all’s done.
          WIT. There they may be bold.
          LUC. Life, they may do any thing there, man, and fear
        neither beadle nor somner:[48] an uncle’s house! a very
        Cole-Harbour.[49] Sirrah, I’ll touch thee near now: hast
        thou so much interest in thy widow, that by a token thou
        couldst presently send for her?
          WIT. Troth, I think I can, uncle.
          LUC. Go to, let me see that.
          WIT. Pray, command one of your men hither, uncle.
          LUC. George!

                           _Re-enter_ GEORGE.

          GEO. Here, sir.
          LUC. Attend my nephew. [WITGOOD _whispers to_ GEORGE,
        _who then goes out_.]—I love a’ life[50] to prattle with
        a rich widow; ’tis pretty, methinks, when our tongues go
        together: and then to promise much and perform little; I
        love that sport a’ life, i’faith: yet I am in the mood
        now to do my nephew some good, if he take me handsomely.
        [_Aside._]—What, have you despatched?
          WIT. I ha’ sent, sir.
          LUC. Yet I must condemn you of unkindness, nephew.
          WIT. Heaven forbid, uncle!
          LUC. Yes, faith, must I. Say your debts be many, your
        creditors importunate, yet the kindness of a thing is
        all, nephew: you might have sent me close word on’t,
        without the least danger or prejudice to your fortunes.
          WIT. Troth, I confess it, uncle; I was to blame there;
        but, indeed, my intent was to have clapped it up
        suddenly, and so have broke forth like a joy to my
        friends, and a wonder to the world: beside, there’s a
        trifle of a forty pound matter toward the setting of me
        forth; my friends should ne’er have known on’t; I meant
        to make shift for that myself.
          LUC. How, nephew? let me not hear such a word again, I
        beseech you: shall I be beholding[51] to you?
          WIT. To me? Alas, what do you mean, uncle?
          LUC. I charge you, upon my love, you trouble nobody but
        myself.
          WIT. You’ve no reason for that, uncle.
          LUC. Troth, I’ll ne’er be friends with you while you
        live, and[52] you do.
          WIT. Nay, and you say so, uncle, here’s my hand; I will
        not do’t.
          LUC. Why, well said! there’s some hope in thee when thou
        wilt be ruled; I’ll make it up fifty, faith, because I
        see thee so reclaimed. Peace; here comes my wife with
        Sam, her t’other husband’s son.

                 _Enter_ MISTRESS LUCRE _and_ FREEDOM.

          WIT. Good aunt.
          FREE. Cousin Witgood, I rejoice in my salute; you’re
        most welcome to this noble city, governed with the sword
        in the scabbard.
          WIT. And the wit in the pommel. [_Aside._]—Good master
        Sam Freedom, I return the salute.
          LUC. By the mass, she’s coming, wife; let me see now how
        thou wilt entertain her.
          MIS. L. I hope I am not to learn, sir, to entertain a
        widow; ’tis not so long ago since I was one myself.

                           _Enter Courtesan._

          WIT. Uncle——
          LUC. She’s come indeed.
          WIT. My uncle was desirous to see you, widow, and I
        presumed to invite you.
          COURT. The presumption was nothing, master Witgood: is
        this your uncle, sir?
          LUC. Marry am I, sweet widow; and his good uncle he
        shall find me; ay, by this smack that I give thee
        [_kisses her_], thou’rt welcome.—Wife, bid the widow
        welcome the same way again,
          FREE. I am a gentleman now too by my father’s
        occupation, and I see no reason but I may kiss a widow
        by my father’s copy: truly, I think the charter is not
        against it; surely these are the words, _The son once a
        gentleman may revel it, though his father were a
        dauber_; ’tis about the fifteenth page: I’ll to her.
        [_Aside, then offers to kiss the Courtesan, who repulses him._
          LUC. You’re not very busy now; a word with thee, sweet
        widow.
          FREE. Coads-nigs! I was never so disgraced since the
        hour my mother whipt me.
          LUC. Beside, I have no child of mine own to care for;
        she’s my second wife, old, past bearing: clap sure to
        him, widow; he’s like to be my heir, I can tell you.
          COURT. Is he so, sir?
          LUC. He knows it already, and the knave’s proud on’t:
        jolly rich widows have been offered him here i’ th’
        city, great merchants’ wives; and do you think he would
        once look upon ’em? forsooth, he’ll none: you are
        beholding[53] to him i’ th’ country, then, ere we could
        be: nay, I’ll hold a wager, widow, if he were once known
        to be in town, he would be presently sought after; nay,
        and happy were they that could catch him first.
          COURT. I think so.
          LUC. O, there would be such running to and fro, widow!
        he should not pass the streets for ’em: he’d be took up
        in one great house or other presently: faugh! they know
        he has it, and must have it. You see this house here,
        widow; this house and all comes to him; goodly rooms,
        ready furnished, ceiled with plaster of Paris, and all
        hung about[54] with cloth of arras.—Nephew.
          WIT. Sir.
          LUC. Shew the widow your house; carry her into all the
        rooms, and bid her welcome.—You shall see, widow.—
        Nephew, strike all sure above and[55] thou beest a good
        boy,—ah!                           [_Aside to_ WITGOOD.
          WIT. Alas, sir, I know not how she would take it!
          LUC. The right way, I warrant t’ye: a pox, art an ass?
        would I were in thy stead! get you up, I am ashamed of
        you. [_Exeunt_ WITGOOD _and Courtesan_]. So: let ’em
        agree as they will now: many a match has been struck up
        in my house a’ this fashion: let ’em try all manner of
        ways, still there’s nothing like an uncle’s house to
        strike the stroke in. I’ll hold my wife in talk a
        little.—Now, Jenny, your son there goes a-wooing to a
        poor gentlewoman but of a thousand [pound] portion: see
        my nephew, a lad of less hope, strikes at four hundred
        a-year in good rubbish.
          MIS. L. Well, we must do as we may, sir.
          LUC. I’ll have his money ready told for him again[56] he
        come down: let me see, too;—by th’ mass, I must present
        the widow with some jewel, a good piece of[57] plate, or
        such a device; ’twill hearten her on well: I have a very
        fair standing cup; and a good high standing cup will
        please a widow above all other pieces.         [_Exit._
          MIS. L. Do you mock us with your nephew?—I have a plot
        in my head, son;—i’faith, husband, to cross you.
          FREE. Is it a tragedy plot, or a comedy plot, good
        mother?
          MIS. L. ’Tis a plot shall vex him. I charge you, of my
        blessing, son Sam, that you presently withdraw the
        action of your love from master Hoard’s niece.
          FREE. How, mother?
          MIS. L. Nay, I have a plot in my head, i’faith. Here,
        take this chain of gold, and this fair diamond: dog
        me the widow home to her lodging, and at thy best
        opportunity fasten ’em both upon her. Nay, I have a
        reach: I can tell you thou art known what thou art, son,
        among the right worshipful, all the twelve companies.
          FREE. Truly, I thank ’em for it.
          MIS. L. He? he’s a scab to thee: and so certify her thou
        hast two hundred a-year of thyself, beside thy good
        parts—a proper person and a lovely. If I were a widow, I
        could find in my heart to have thee myself, son; ay,
        from ’em all.
          FREE. Thank you for your good will, mother; but, indeed,
        I had rather have a stranger: and if I woo her not in
        that violent fashion, that I will make her be glad to
        take these gifts ere I leave her, let me never be called
        the heir of your body.
          MIS. L. Nay, I know there’s enough in you, son, if you
        once come to put it forth.
          FREE. I’ll quickly make a bolt or a shaft on’t.[58]
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                     _Enter_ HOARD _and_ MONEYLOVE.
          MON. Faith, master Hoard, I have bestowed many months in
        the suit of your niece, such was the dear love I ever
        bore to her virtues: but since she hath so extremely
        denied me, I am to lay out for my fortunes elsewhere.
          HOA. Heaven forbid but you should, sir! I ever told you
        my niece stood otherwise affected.
          MON. I must confess you did, sir; yet, in regard of my
        great loss of time, and the zeal with which I sought
        your niece, shall I desire one favour of your worship?
          HOA. In regard of those two, ’tis hard but you shall,
        sir.
          MON. I shall rest grateful: ’tis not full three hours,
        sir, since the happy rumour of a rich country widow came
        to my hearing.
          HOA. How? a rich country widow?
          MON. Four hundred a-year landed.
          HOA. Yea?
          MON. Most firm, sir; and I have learnt her lodging: here
        my suit begins, sir; if I might but entreat your worship
        to be a countenance for me, and speak a good word (for
        your words will pass), I nothing doubt but I might set
        fair for the widow; nor shall your labour, sir, end
        altogether in thanks; two hundred angels[59]——
          HOA. So, so: what suitors has she?
          MON. There lies the comfort, sir; the report of her is
        yet but a whisper; and only solicited by young riotous
        Witgood, nephew to your mortal adversary.
          HOA. Ha! art certain he’s her suitor?
          MON. Most certain, sir; and his uncle very industrious
        to beguile the widow, and make up the match.
          HOA. So: very good.
          MON. Now, sir, you know this young Witgood is a
        spendthrift, dissolute fellow.
          HOA. A very rascal.
          MON. A midnight surfeiter.
          HOA. The spume of a brothel-house.
          MON. True, sir: which being well told in your worship’s
        phrase, may both heave him out of her mind, and drive a
        fair way for me to the widow’s affections.
          HOA. Attend me about five.
          MON. With my best care, sir.                 [_Exit._
          HOA. Fool, thou hast left thy treasure with a thief,
        To trust a widower with a suit in love!
        Happy revenge, I hug thee! I have not only the means
        laid before me, extremely to cross my adversary, and
        confound the last hopes of his nephew, but thereby to
        enrich my state, augment my revenues, and build mine own
        fortunes greater: ha, ha!
        I’ll mar your phrase, o’erturn your flatteries,
        Undo your windings, policies, and plots,
        Fall like a secret and despatchful plague
        On your secured comforts. Why, I am able
        To buy three of Lucre; thrice outbid him,
        Let my out-monies be reckoned and all.

                _Enter Three of_ WITGOOD’S _Creditors_.

          FIRST C. I am glad of this news.
          SEC. C. So are we, by my faith.
          THIRD C. Young Witgood will be a gallant again now.
          HOA. Peace.                           [_Listening._
          FIRST C. I promise you, master Cockpit, she’s a mighty
        rich widow.
          SEC. C. Why, have you ever heard of her?
          FIRST C. Who? widow Medler? she lies open to much
        rumour.
          THIRD C. Four hundred a-year, they say, in very good
        land.
          FIRST C. Nay, take’t of my word, if you believe that,
        you believe the least.
          SEC. C. And to see how close he keeps it!
          FIRST C. O, sir, there’s policy in that, to prevent
        better suitors.
          THIRD C. He owes me a hundred pound, and I protest I
        ne’er looked for a penny.
          FIRST C. He little dreams of our coming; he’ll wonder to
        see his creditors upon him.        [_Exeunt Creditors._
          HOA. Good, his creditors: I’ll follow. This makes for
             me:
        All know the widow’s wealth; and ’tis well known
        I can estate her fairly, ay, and will.
        In this one chance shines a twice happy fate;
        I both deject my foe and raise my state.       [_Exit._


                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                          WITGOOD’S _Lodging_.

                 _Enter_ WITGOOD _and Three Creditors_.
          WIT. Why, alas, my creditors, could you find no other
        time to undo me but now? rather your malice appears in
        this than the justness of the debt.
          FIRST C. Master Witgood, I have forborne my money long.
          WIT. I pray, speak low, sir: what do you mean?
          SEC. C. We hear you are to be married suddenly to a rich
        country widow.
          WIT. What can be kept so close but you creditors hear
        on’t! well, ’tis a lamentable state, that our chiefest
        afflictors should first hear of our fortunes. Why, this
        is no good course, i’faith, sirs: if ever you have hope
        to be satisfied, why do you seek to confound the means
        that should work it? there’s neither piety, no, nor
        policy in that. Shine favourably now: why, I may rise
        and spread again, to your great comforts.
          FIRST C. He says true, i’faith.
          WIT. Remove me[60] now, and I consume for ever.
          SEC. C. Sweet gentleman!
          WIT. How can it thrive which from the sun you sever?
          THIRD. C. It cannot, indeed.
          WIT. O, then, shew patience! I shall have enough
        To satisfy you all.
          FIRST C. Ay, if we could
        Be content, a shame take us!
          WIT. For, look you;
        I am but newly sure yet to[61] the widow,
        And what a rend might this discredit make!
        Within these three days will I bind you lands
        For your securities.
          FIRST C. No, good master Witgood:
        Would ’twere as much as we dare trust you with!
          WIT. I know you have been kind; however, now,
        Either by wrong report, or false incitement,
        Your gentleness is injured: in such
        A state as this a man cannot want foes.
        If on the sudden he begin to rise,
        No man that lives can count his enemies.
        You had some intelligence, I warrant ye,
        From an ill-willer.
          SEC. C. Faith, we heard you brought up a rich widow,
        sir, and were suddenly to marry her.
          WIT. Ay, why there it was: I knew ’twas so: but since
        you are so well resolved[62] of my faith toward you, let
        me be so much favoured of you, I beseech you all——
          ALL. O, it shall not need, i’faith, sir!——
          WIT. As to lie still awhile, and bury my debts in
        silence, till I be fully possessed of the widow; for the
        truth is—I may tell you as my friends—
          ALL. O, O, O!——
          WIT. I am to raise a little money in the city, toward
        the setting forth of myself, for mine own credit and
        your comfort; now, if my former debts should be
        divulged, all hope of my proceedings were quite
        extinguished.
          FIRST C. Do you hear, sir? I may deserve your custom
        hereafter; pray, let my money be accepted before a
        stranger’s: here’s forty pound I received as I came to
        you; if that may stand you in any stead, make use on’t.
        [_Offers him money, which he at first declines._] Nay,
        pray, sir; ’tis at your service.   [_Aside to_ WITGOOD.
          WIT. You do so ravish me with kindness, that I am[63]
        constrain’d to play the maid, and take it.
          FIRST C. Let none of them see it, I beseech you.
          WIT. Faugh!
          FIRST C. I hope I shall be first in your remembrance
        After the marriage rites.
          WIT. Believe it firmly.
          FIRST C. So.—What, do you walk, sirs?
          SEC. C. I go.—Take no care, sir, for money to furnish
        you; within this hour I’ll send you sufficient. [_Aside
        to_ WITGOOD.]—Come, master Cockpit, we both stay for
        you.
          THIRD C. I ha’ lost a ring, i’faith; I’ll follow you
        presently: [_exeunt First and Second Creditors_]—but you
        shall find it, sir; I know your youth and expenses have
        disfurnished you of all jewels: there’s a ruby of twenty
        pound price, sir; bestow it upon your widow. [_Offers
        him the ring, which he at first declines._]—What, man!
        ’twill call up her blood to you; beside, if I might so
        much work with you, I would not have you beholding[64]
        to those bloodsuckers for any money.
          WIT. Not I, believe it.
          THIRD C. They’re a brace of cut-throats.
          WIT. I know ’em.
          THIRD C. Send a note of all your wants to my shop, and
        I’ll supply you instantly.
          WIT. Say you so? why, here’s my hand then, no man living
        shall do’t but thyself.
          THIRD C. Shall I carry it away from ’em both, then?
          WIT. I’faith, shalt thou.
          THIRD C. Troth, then, I thank you, sir.
          WIT. Welcome, good master Cockpit. [_Exit Third
        Creditor._]—Ha, ha, ha! why, is not this better now than
        lying a-bed? I perceive there’s nothing conjures up wit
        sooner than poverty, and nothing lays it down sooner
        than wealth and lechery: this has some savour yet. O
        that I had the mortgage from mine uncle as sure in
        possession as these trifles! I would forswear brothel at
        noonday, and muscadine and eggs at midnight.
          COURT. [_within_] Master Witgood, where are you?
          WIT. Holla!

                           _Enter Courtesan._

          COURT. Rich news!
          WIT. Would ’twere all in plate!
          COURT. There’s some in chains and jewels: I am so
        haunted with suitors, master Witgood, I know not which
        to despatch first.
          WIT. You have the better term,[65] by my faith.
          COURT. Among the number
        One master Hoard, an ancient gentleman.
          WIT. Upon my life, my uncle’s adversary.
          COURT. It may well hold so, for he rails on you,
        Speaks shamefully of him.
          WIT. As I could wish it.
          COURT. I first denied him, but so cunningly,
        It rather promis’d him assured hopes,
        Than any loss of labour.
          WIT. Excellent!
          COURT. I expect him every hour with gentlemen,
        With whom he labours to make good his words,
        To approve you riotous, your state consum’d,
        Your uncle——
          WIT. Wench, make up thy own fortunes now; do thyself a
        good turn once in thy days: he’s rich in money,
        movables, and lands; marry him: he’s an old doating
        fool, and that’s worth all; marry him: ’twould be a
        great comfort to me to see thee do well, i’faith; marry
        him: ’twould ease my conscience well to see thee well
        bestowed; I have a care of thee, i’faith.
          COURT. Thanks, sweet master Witgood.
          WIT. I reach at farther happiness: first, I am sure it
        can be no harm to thee, and there may happen goodness to
        me by it: prosecute it well; let’s send up for our wits,
        now we require their best and most pregnant assistance.
          COURT. Step in, I think I hear ’em.        [_Exeunt._

        _Enter_ HOARD _and Gentlemen, with the Host as Servant_.

          HOA. Art thou the widow’s man? by my faith, sh’as a
        company of proper men then.
          HOST. I am the worst of six, sir; good enough for blue
        coats.[66]
          HOA. Hark hither: I hear say thou art in most credit
        with her.
          HOST. Not so, sir.
          HOA. Come, come, thou’rt modest: there’s a brace of
        royals;[67] prithee, help me to th’ speech of her.
                                            [_Gives him money._
          HOST. I’ll do what I may, sir, always saving myself
        harmless.
          HOA. Go to, do’t, I say; thou shalt hear better from me.
          HOST. Is not this a better place than five mark a-year
        standing wages? Say a man had but three such clients in
        a day, methinks he might make a poor living on’t;
        beside, I was never brought up with so little honesty to
        refuse any man’s money; never: what gulls there are a’
        this side the world! now know I the widow’s mind; none
        but my young master comes in her clutches: ha, ha, ha!
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          HOA. Now, my dear gentlemen, stand firmly to me;
        You know his follies and my worth.
          FIRST G. We do, sir.
          SEC. G. But, master Hoard, are you sure he is not i’ th’
        house now?
          HOA. Upon my honesty, I chose this time
        A’ purpose, fit: the spendthrift is abroad:
        Assist me; here she comes.

                           _Enter Courtesan._

                                   Now, my sweet widow.
          COURT. You’re welcome, master Hoard.
          HOA. Despatch, sweet gentlemen, despatch.—
        I am come, widow, to prove those my words
        Neither of envy sprung nor of false tongues,
        But such as their[68] deserts and actions
        Do merit and bring forth; all which these gentlemen,
        Well known, and better reputed, will confess.
          COURT. I cannot tell
        How my affections may dispose of me;
        But surely if they find him so desertless,
        They’ll have that reason to withdraw themselves:
        And therefore, gentlemen, I do entreat you,
        As you are fair in reputation
        And in appearing form, so shine in truth:
        I am a widow, and, alas, you know,
        Soon overthrown! ’tis a very small thing
        That we withstand, our weakness is so great:
        Be partial unto neither, but deliver,
        Without affection, your opinion.
          HOA. And that will drive it home.
          COURT. Nay, I beseech your silence, master Hoard;
        You are a party.
          HOA. Widow, not a word.
          FIRST G. The better first to work you to belief,
        Know neither of us owe him flattery,
        Nor t’other malice; but unbribed censure,[69]
        So help us our best fortunes![70]
          COURT. It suffices.
          FIRST G. That Witgood is a riotous, undone man,
        Imperfect both in fame and in estate,
        His debts wealthier than he, and executions
        In wait for his due body, we’ll maintain
        With our best credit and our dearest blood.
          COURT. Nor land nor living, say you? Pray, take heed
        You do not wrong the gentleman.
          FIRST G. What we speak
        Our lives and means are ready to make good.
          COURT. Alas, how soon are we poor souls beguil’d!
                                              [_Aside to Gent._
          SEC. G. And for his uncle——
          HOA. Let that come to me.
        His uncle[’s] a severe extortioner;
        A tyrant at a forfeiture; greedy of others’
        Miseries; one that would undo his brother,
        Nay, swallow up his father, if he can,
        Within the fathoms of his conscience.
          FIRST G. Nay, believe it, widow,
        You had not only match’d yourself to wants,
        But in an evil and unnatural stock.
          HOA. Follow hard, gentlemen, follow hard.
          COURT. Is my love so deceiv’d? Before you all
        I do renounce him; on my knees I vow       [_Kneeling._
        He ne’er shall marry me.
          WIT. [_looking in_] Heaven knows he never meant it!
                     [_Aside._
          HOA. There, take her at the bound. [_Aside to Gent._
          FIRST G. Then, with a new and pure affection
        Behold yon gentleman; grave, kind, and rich,
        A match worthy yourself: esteeming him,
        You do regard your state.
          HOA. I’ll make her a jointure, say. [_Aside to
             Gent._
          FIRST G. He can join land to land, and will possess
             you
        Of what you can desire.
          SEC. G. Come, widow, come.
          COURT. The world is so deceitful!
          FIRST G. There ’tis deceitful,
        Where flattery, want, and imperfection lie;[71]
        But none of these in him: push![72]
          COURT. Pray, sir——
          FIRST G. Come, you widows are ever most backward when
        you should do yourselves most good; but were it to marry
        a chin not worth a hair now, then you would be forward
        enough. Come, clap hands, a match.
          HOA. With all my heart, widow. [HOARD _and Courtesan
             shake hands_.]—Thanks, gentlemen:
        I will deserve your labour, and [_to Courtesan_] thy
           love.
          COURT. Alas, you love not widows but for wealth!
        I promise you I ha’ nothing, sir.
          HOA. Well said, widow,
        Well said; thy love is all I seek, before
        These gentlemen.
          COURT. Now I must hope the best.
          HOA. My joys are such they want to be express’d.
          COURT. But, master Hoard, one thing I must remember you
        of, before these gentlemen, your friends: how shall I
        suddenly avoid the loathed soliciting of that perjured
        Witgood, and his tedious, dissembling uncle? who this
        very day hath appointed a meeting for the same purpose
        too; where, had not truth come forth, I had been undone,
        utterly undone!
          HOA. What think you of that, gentlemen?
          FIRST G. ’Twas well devised.
          HOA. Hark thee, widow: train out young Witgood single;
        hasten him thither with thee, somewhat before the
        hour; where, at the place appointed, these gentlemen
        and myself will wait the opportunity, when, by some
        slight[73] removing him from thee, we’ll suddenly
        enter and surprise thee, carry thee away by boat to
        Cole-Harbour,[74] have a priest ready, and there clap
        it up instantly. How likest it, widow?
          COURT. In that it pleaseth you, it likes[75] me well.
          HOA. I’ll kiss thee for those words. [_Kisses her._]—
             Come, gentlemen,
        Still must I live a suitor to your favours,
        Still to your aid beholding.[76]
          FIRST G. We’re engag’d, sir;
        ’Tis for our credits now to see’t well ended.
          HOA. ’Tis for your honours, gentlemen; nay, look to’t.
        Not only in joy, but I in wealth excel:
        No more sweet widow, but, sweet wife, farewell.
          COURT. Farewell, sir.
                               [_Exeunt_ HOARD _and Gentlemen_.

                          _Re-enter_ WITGOOD.
          WIT. O for more scope! I could laugh eternally! Give you
        joy, mistress Hoard, I promise your fortune was good,
        forsooth; you’ve fell upon wealth enough, and there’s
        young gentlemen enow can help you to the rest. Now it
        requires our wits: carry thyself but heedfully now, and
        we are both——

                            _Re-enter Host._

          HOST. Master Witgood, your uncle.
          WIT. Cuds me! remove thyself awhile; I’ll serve for him.
                                  [_Exeunt Courtesan and Host._

                             _Enter_ LUCRE.

          LUC. Nephew, good morrow, nephew.
          WIT. The same to you, kind uncle.
          LUC. How fares the widow? does the meeting hold?
          WIT. O, no question of that, sir.
          LUC. I’ll strike the stroke, then, for thee; no more
             days.[77]
          WIT. The sooner the better, uncle. O, she’s mightily
        followed!
          LUC. And yet so little rumoured!
          WIT. Mightily: here comes one old gentleman, and he’ll
        make her a jointure of three hundred a-year, forsooth;
        another wealthy suitor will estate his son in his
        lifetime, and make him weigh down the widow; here a
        merchant’s son will possess her with no less than three
        goodly lordships at once, which were all pawns to his
        father.
          LUC. Peace, nephew, let me hear no more of ’em; it mads
        me. Thou shalt prevent[78] ’em all. No words to the
        widow of my coming hither. Let me see—’tis now upon
        nine: before twelve, nephew, we will have the bargain
        struck, we will, faith, boy.
          WIT. O, my precious uncle!                 [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                      _A Room in_ HOARD’S _House_.

                       _Enter_ HOARD _and_ JOYCE.

          HOA. Niece, sweet niece, prithee, have a care to my
        house; I leave all to thy discretion. Be content to
        dream awhile; I’ll have a husband for thee shortly: put
        that care upon me, wench, for in choosing wives and
        husbands I am only fortunate; I have that gift given me.
                                                       [_Exit._
          JOY. But ’tis not likely you should choose for me,
        Since nephew to your chiefest enemy
        Is he whom I affect: but, O, forgetful!
        Why dost thou flatter thy affections so,
        With name of him that for a widow’s bed
        Neglects thy purer love? Can it be so,
        Or does report dissemble?

                            _Enter_ GEORGE.

                                    How now, sir?
          GEO. A letter, with which came a private charge.
          JOY. Therein I thank your care. [_Exit_ GEORGE.]—I
             know this hand—

        [_Reads_] _Dearer than sight, what the world reports of
        me, yet believe not; rumour will alter shortly: be thou
        constant; I am still the same that I was in love, and I
        hope to be the same in fortunes._
                                        THEODORUS WITGOOD.

        I am resolv’d:[79] no more shall fear or doubt
        Raise their pale powers to keep affection out.
           [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                              _A Tavern._

              _Enter_ HOARD, _Gentlemen,[80] and Drawer_.
          DRA. You’re very welcome, gentlemen.—Dick, shew those
        gentlemen the Pomegranate there.
          HOA. Hist!
          DRA. Up those stairs, gentlemen.
          HOA. Hist, drawer!
          DRA. Anon, sir.
          HOA. Prithee, ask at the bar if a gentlewoman came not
        in lately.
          DRA. William, at the bar, did you see any gentlewoman
        come in lately? Speak you ay, speak you no.
          [_Within._] No, none came in yet but mistress Florence.
          DRA. He says none came in yet, sir, but one mistress
        Florence.
          HOA. What is that Florence? a widow?
          DRA. Yes, a Dutch widow.[81] HOA. How?
          DRA. That’s an English drab, sir: give your worship good
        morrow.                                       [_Exit._
          HOA. A merry knave, i’faith! I shall remember a Dutch
        widow the longest day of my life.
          FIRST G. Did not I use most art to win the widow?
          SEC. G. You shall pardon me for that, sir; master Hoard
        knows I took her at best ’vantage.
          HOA. What’s that, sweet gentlemen, what’s that?
          SEC. G. He will needs bear me down, that his art only
        wrought with the widow most.
          HOA. O, you did both well, gentlemen, you did both well,
        I thank you.
          FIRST G. I was the first that moved her.
          HOA. You were, i’faith.
          SEC. G. But it was I that took her at the bound.
          HOA. Ay, that was you: faith, gentlemen, ’tis right.
          THIRD G. I boasted least, but ’twas I join’d their
             hands.
          HOA. By th’ mass, I think he did: you did all well,
        Gentlemen, you did all well; contend no more.
          FIRST G. Come, yon room’s fittest.
          HOA. True, ’tis next the door.             [_Exeunt._

            _Enter_ WITGOOD, _Courtesan, Host, and Drawer_.

          DRA. You’re very welcome: please you to walk up stairs;
        cloth’s laid, sir.
          COURT. Up stairs? troth, I am very[82] weary, master
        Witgood.
          WIT. Rest yourself here awhile, widow; we’ll have a cup
        of muscadine in this little room.
          DRA. A cup of muscadine? You shall have the best, sir.
          WIT. But, do you hear, sirrah?
          DRA. Do you call? anon, sir.
          WIT. What is there provided for dinner?
          DRA. I cannot readily tell you, sir: if you please you
        may go into the kitchen and see yourself, sir; many
        gentlemen of worship do use to do it, I assure you, sir.
                                                       [_Exit._
          HOST. A pretty familiar, prigging[83] rascal; he has his
        part without book.
          WIT. Against you are ready to drink to me, widow, I’ll
        be present to pledge you.
          COURT. Nay, I commend your care, ’tis done well of you.
        [_Exit_ WITGOOD.]—’Las,[84] what have I forgot!
          HOST. What, mistress?
          COURT. I slipt my wedding-ring off when I washed, and
        left it at my lodging: prithee, run; I shall be sad
        without it. [_Exit Host._]—So, he’s gone. Boy.

                              _Enter Boy._

          BOY. Anon, forsooth.
          COURT. Come hither, sirrah; learn secretly if one master
        Hoard, an ancient gentleman, be about house.
          BOY. I heard such a one named.
          COURT. Commend me to him.

                   _Re-enter_ HOARD _and Gentlemen_.

          HOA. Ay, boy,[85] do thy commendations.
          COURT. O, you come well: away, to boat, begone.
          HOA. Thus wise men are reveng’d, give two for one.
                    [_Exeunt._

                   _Re-enter_ WITGOOD _and_ VINTNER.

          WIT. I must request
        You, sir, to shew extraordinary care:
        My uncle comes with gentlemen, his friends,
        And ’tis upon a making.[86]
          VIN. Is it so?
        I’ll give a special charge, good master Witgood.
        May I be bold to see her?
          WIT. Who? [t]he widow?
        With all my heart, i’faith, I’ll bring you to her.
          VIN. If she be a Staffordshire gentlewoman, ’tis much if
        I know her not.
          WIT. How now? boy! drawer!
          VIN. Hie!

                            _Re-enter Boy._

          BOY. Do you call, sir?
          WIT. Went the gentlewoman up that was here?
          BOY. Up, sir? she went out, sir.
          WIT. Out, sir?
          BOY. Out, sir: one master Hoard, with a guard of
        gentlemen, carried her out at back door, a pretty while
        since, sir.
          WIT. Hoard? death and darkness! Hoard?

                            _Re-enter Host._

          HOST. The devil of ring I can find.
          WIT. How now? what news? where’s the widow?
          HOST. My mistress? is she not here, sir?
          WIT. More madness yet!
          HOST. She sent me for a ring.
          WIT. A plot, a plot!—To boat! she’s stole away.
          HOST. What?

                     _Enter_ LUCRE _and Gentlemen_.

          WIT. Follow! inquire old Hoard, my uncle’s adversary.
                                                  [_Exit Host._
          LUC. Nephew, what’s that?
          WIT. Thrice-miserable wretch!
          LUC. Why, what’s the matter?
          VIN. The widow’s borne away, sir.
          LUC. Ha? passion of me!—A heavy welcome, gentlemen.
          FIRST G. The widow gone?
          LUC. Who durst attempt it?
          WIT. Who but old Hoard, my uncle’s adversary?
          LUC. How!
          WIT. With his confederates.
          LUC. Hoard, my deadly enemy?—Gentlemen, stand to me,
        I will not bear it; ’tis in hate of me;
        That villain seeks my shame, nay, thirsts my blood;
        He owes me mortal malice.
        I’ll spend my wealth on this despiteful plot,
        Ere he shall cross me and my nephew thus.
          WIT. So maliciously!

                            _Re-enter Host._

          LUC. How now, you treacherous rascal?
          HOST. That’s none of my name, sir.
          WIT. Poor soul, he knew not on’t!
          LUC. I’m sorry. I see then ’twas a mere plot.
          HOST. I trac’d ’em nearly——
          LUC.[87] Well?
          HOST. And hear for certain
        They have took Cole-Harbour.[88]
          LUC. The devil’s sanctuary!
        They shall not rest; I’ll pluck her from his arms.—
        Kind and dear gentlemen,
        If ever I had seat within your breasts——
          FIRST G. No more, good sir; it is a wrong to us
        To see you injur’d: in a cause so just
        We’ll spend our lives but we will right our friends.
          LUC. Honest and kind! come, we’ve[89] delay’d too
             long:
        Nephew, take comfort; a just cause is strong.
          WIT. That’s all my comfort, uncle. [_Exeunt all
        but_ WITGOOD.] Ha, ha, ha!
        Now may events fall luckily and well:
        He that ne’er strives, says wit, shall ne’er excel.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                     _A Room in_ DAMPIT’S _House_.

                        _Enter_ DAMPIT, _drunk_.
          DAM. When did I say my prayers? In anno 88, when the
        great armada was coming; and in anno 89,[90] when the
        great thundering and lightning was, I prayed heartily
        then, i’faith, to overthrow Poovies’ new buildings; I
        kneeled by my great iron chest, I remember.

                            _Enter_ AUDREY.

          AUD. Master Dampit, one may hear you before they see
        you: you keep sweet hours, master Dampit; we were all
        a-bed three hours ago.
          DAM. Audrey?
          AUD. O, you’re a fine gentleman!
          DAM. So I am, i’faith, and a fine scholar: do you use to
        go to bed so early, Audrey?
          AUD. Call you this early, master Dampit?
          DAM. Why, is’t not one of clock i’ th’ morning? is not
        that early enough? fetch me a glass of fresh beer.
          AUD. Here, I have warmed your nightcap for you, master
        Dampit.
          DAM. Draw it on then. I am very weak truly: I have not
        eaten so much as the bulk of an egg these three days.
          AUD. You have drunk the more, master Dampit.
          DAM. What’s that?
          AUD. You mought, and[91] you would, master Dampit.
          DAM. I answer you, I cannot: hold your prating; you
        prate too much, and understand too little: are you
        answered? Give me a glass of beer.
          AUD. May I ask you how you do, master Dampit?
          DAM. How do I? i’faith, naught.
          AUD. I ne’er knew you do otherwise.
          DAM. I eat not one pen’north of bread these two
        years.[92] Give me a glass of fresh beer. I am not sick,
        nor I am not well.
          AUD. Take this warm napkin about your neck, sir, whilst
        I help to make you unready.[93]
          DAM. How now, Audrey-prater, with your scurvy devices,
        what say you now?
          AUD. What say I, master Dampit? I say nothing, but that
        you are very weak.
          DAM. Faith, thou hast more cony-catching[94] devices
        than all London.
          AUD. Why, master Dampit, I never deceived you in all my
        life.
          DAM. Why was that? because I never did trust thee.
          AUD. I care not what you say, master Dampit.
          DAM. Hold thy prating: I answer thee, thou art a beggar,
        a quean, and a bawd: are you answered?
          AUD. Fie, master Dampit! a gentleman, and have such
        words?
          DAM. Why, thou base drudge of infortunity, thou
        kitchen-stuff-drab of beggary, roguery, and cockscombry,
        thou cavernesed quean of foolery, knavery, and
        bawdreaminy, I’ll tell thee what, I will not give a
        louse for thy fortunes.
          AUD. No, master Dampit? and there’s a gentleman comes
        a-wooing to me, and he doubts[95] nothing but that you
        will get me from him.
          DAM. I? If I would either have thee or lie with thee
        for two thousand pound, would I might be damned! why,
        thou base, impudent quean of foolery, flattery, and
        coxcombry, are you answered?
          AUD. Come, will you rise and go to bed, sir?
          DAMP. Rise, and go to bed too, Audrey? How does mistress
        Proserpine?
          AUD. Fooh!
          DAM. She’s as fine a philosopher of a stinkard’s wife,
        as any within the liberties. Faugh, faugh, Audrey!
          AUD. How now, master Dampit?
          DAM. Fie upon’t, what a choice of stinks here is! what
        hast thou done, Audrey? fie upon’t, here’s a choice of
        stinks indeed! Give me a glass of fresh beer, and then I
        will to bed.
          AUD. It waits for you above, sir.
          DAM. Foh! I think they burn horns in Barnard’s Inn. If
        ever I smelt such an abominable stink, usury forsake me.
                                [_Exit._
          AUD. They be the stinking nails of his trampling feet,
        and he talks of burning of horns.              [_Exit._


                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


                  _An Apartment at Cole-Harbour._[96]

          _Enter_ HOARD, _Courtesan_, LAMPREY, SPICHCOCK, _and
                              Gentlemen_.

          FIRST G. Join hearts, join hands,
        In wedlock’s bands,
        Never to part
        Till death cleave your heart.
        [_To_ HOARD] You shall forsake all other women;
        [_To Courtesan_] You lords, knights, gentlemen, and
           yeomen.
        What my tongue slips
        Make up with your lips.
          HOA. [_kisses her_] Give you joy, mistress Hoard: let
             the kiss come about.                   [_Knocking._
        Who knocks? Convey my little pig-eater[97] out.
          LUC. [_within_] Hoard!
          HOA. Upon my life, my adversary, gentlemen!
          LUC. [_within_] Hoard, open the door, or we will force
             it ope:
        Give us the widow.
          HOA. Gentlemen, keep ’em out.
          LAM. He comes upon his death that enters here.
          ᚠLUC. [_within_] My friends, assist me!
          HOA. He has assistants, gentlemen.
          LAM. Tut, nor him nor them we in this action fear.
          LUC. [_within_] Shall I, in peace, speak one word with
             the widow?
          COURT. Husband, and gentlemen, hear me but a word.
          HOA. Freely, sweet wife.
          COURT. Let him in peaceably;
        You know we’re sure from any act of his.
          HOA. Most true.
          COURT.[98] You may stand by and smile at his old
             weakness:
        Let me alone to answer him.
          HOA. Content;
        ’Twill be good mirth, i’faith. How think you, gentlemen?
          LAM. Good gullery!
          HOA. Upon calm conditions let him in.
          LUC. [_within_] All spite and malice!
          LAM. Hear me, master Lucre:
        So you will vow a peaceful entrance
        With those your friends, and only exercise
        Calm conference with the widow, without fury,
        The passage shall receive you.
          LUC. [_within_] I do vow it.
          LAM. Then enter and talk freely: here she stands.

                _Enter_ LUCRE, _Gentlemen_, _and Host_.

          LUC. O, master Hoard, your spite has watch’d the hour!
        You’re excellent at vengeance, master Hoard.
          HOA. Ha, ha, ha!
          LUC. I am the fool you laugh at:
        You are wise, sir, and know the seasons well.—
        Come hither, widow: why is it thus?
        O, you have done me infinite disgrace,
        And your own credit no small injury!
        Suffer mine enemy so despitefully
        To bear you from my nephew? O, I had
        Rather half my substance had been forfeit
        And begg’d by some starv’d rascal!
          COURT. Why, what would you wish me do, sir?
        I must not overthrow my state for love:
        We have too many precedents for that;
        From thousands of our wealthy undone widows
        One may derive some wit. I do confess
        I lov’d your nephew, nay, I did affect him
        Against the mind and liking of my friends;[99]
        Believ’d his promises; lay here in hope
        Of flatter’d living, and the boast of lands:
        Coming to touch his wealth and state, indeed,
        It appears dross; I find him not the man;
        Imperfect, mean, scarce furnish’d of his needs;
        In words, fair lordships; in performance, hovels:
        Can any woman love the thing that is not?
          LUC. Broke you for this?
          COURT. Was it not cause too much?
        Send to inquire his state: most part of it
        Lay two years mortgag’d in his uncle’s hands.
          LUC. Why, say it did, you might have known my mind:
        I could have soon restor’d it.
          COURT. Ay, had I but seen any such thing perform’d,
        Why, ’twould have tied my affection, and contain’d
        Me in my first desires: do you think, i’faith,
        That I could twine such a dry oak as this,
        Had promise in your nephew took effect?
          LUC. Why, and there’s no time past; and rather than
        My adversary should thus thwart my hopes,
        I would——
          COURT. Tut, you’ve been ever full of golden speech:
        If words were lands, your nephew would be rich.
          LUC. Widow, believe’t,[100] I vow by my best bliss,
        Before these gentlemen, I will give in
        The mortgage to my nephew instantly,
        Before I sleep or eat.
          FIRST G. [_friend to_ LUCRE] We’ll pawn our credits,
        Widow, what he speaks shall be perform’d
        In fulness.
          LUC. Nay, more; I will estate him
        In farther blessings; he shall be my heir;
        I have no son;[101]
        I’ll bind myself to that condition.
          COURT. When I shall hear this done, I shall soon yield
        To reasonable terms.
          LUC. In the mean season,
        Will you protest, before these gentlemen,
        To keep yourself as you’re[102] now at this present?
          COURT. I do protest, before these gentlemen,
        I will be as clear then as I am now.

          LUC. I do believe you. Here’s your own honest servant,
        I’ll take him along with me.
          COURT. Ay, with all my heart.
          LUC. He shall see all perform’d, and bring you word.
          COURT. That’s all I wait for.
          HOA. What, have you finished, master Lucre? ha, ha,
             ha, ha!
          LUC. So laugh, Hoard, laugh at your poor enemy, do;
        The wind may turn, you may be laugh’d at too;
        Yes, marry may you, sir.—Ha, ha, ha, [ha]!
                      [_Exeunt_ LUCRE, _Gentlemen_, _and Host_.
          HOA. Ha, ha![103] if every man that swells in malice
        Could be reveng’d as happily as I,
        He would choose hate, and forswear amity.—
        What did he say, wife, prithee?
          COURT. Faith, spoke to ease his mind.
          HOA. O, O, O!
          COURT. You know now little to any purpose.
          HOA. True, true, true!
          COURT. He would do mountains now.
          HOA. Ay, ay, ay, ay.
          LAM. You’ve struck him dead, master Hoard.
          SPI. And[104] his nephew desperate.
          HOA. I know’t, sirs, I.
        Never did man so crush his enemy.             [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                      _A Room in_ LUCRE’S _House_.

           _Enter_ LUCRE, _Gentlemen_, _and Host_, _meeting_
                                FREEDOM.

          LUC. My son-in-law, Sam Freedom, where’s my nephew?
          FREE. _O man in lamentation_,[105] father.
          LUC. How!
          FREE. He thumps his breast like a gallant dicer that has
        lost his doublet, and stands in’s shirt to do penance.
          LUC. Alas, poor gentleman!
          FREE. I warrant you may hear him sigh in a still evening
        to your house at Highgate.
          LUC. I prithee, send him in.
          FREE. Were it to do a greater matter, I will not stick
        with you, sir, in regard you married my mother.
                                 [_Exit._
          LUC. Sweet gentlemen, cheer him up; I will but fetch the
        mortgage and return to you instantly.
          FIRST G. We’ll do our best, sir. [_Exit Lucre._]—
                                           See where he comes,
        E’en joyless and regardless of all form.

                            _Enter_ WITGOOD.

          SEC. G. Why, how now,[106] master Witgood? Fie! you a
        firm scholar, and an understanding gentleman, and give
        your best parts to passion?[107]
          FIRST G. Come, fie, fie![108]
          WIT. O, gentlemen——
          FIRST G. Sorrow of me, what a sigh was there, sir!
        Nine such widows are not worth it.
          WIT. To be borne from me by that lecher Hoard!
          FIRST G. That vengeance is your uncle’s; being done
        More in despite to him than wrong to you:
        But we bring comfort now.
          WIT. I beseech you, gentlemen——
          SEC. G. Cheer thyself, man; there’s hope of her,
             i’faith.
          WIT. Too gladsome to be true.

                           _Re-enter LUCRE._

          LUC. Nephew, what cheer?
        Alas, poor gentleman, how art thou chang’d!
        Call thy fresh blood into thy cheeks again:
        She comes.
          WIT. Nothing afflicts me so much,
        But that it is your adversary, uncle,
        And merely plotted in despite of you.
          LUC. Ay, that’s it mads me, spites me! I’ll spend my
        wealth ere he shall carry her so, because I know ’tis
        only to spite me. Ay, this is it. Here, nephew [_giving
        a paper_], before these kind gentlemen, I deliver in
        your mortgage, my promise to the widow; see, ’tis done:
        be wise, you’re once more master of your own. The widow
        shall perceive now you are not altogether such a beggar
        as the world reputes you; you can make shift to bring
        her to three hundred a-year, sir.
          FIRST G. Byrlady,[109] and that’s no toy,[110] sir.
          LUC. A word, nephew.
          FIRST G. [_to Host_] Now you may certify the widow.
          LUC. You must conceive it aright, nephew, now;
        To do you good I am content to do this.
          WIT. I know it, sir.
          LUC. But your own conscience can tell I had it
        Dearly enough of you.
          WIT. Ay, that’s most certain.
          LUC. Much money laid out, beside many a journey
        To fetch the rent; I hope you’ll think on’t, nephew.
          WIT. I were worse than a beast else, i’faith.
          LUC. Although, to blind the widow and the world,
        I out of policy do’t, yet there’s a conscience, nephew.
          WIT. Heaven forbid else!
          LUC. When you are full possess’d,
        ’Tis nothing to return it.
          WIT. Alas, a thing quickly done, uncle!
          LUC. Well said! you know I give it you but in trust.
          WIT. Pray, let me understand you rightly, uncle:
        You give it me but in trust?
          LUC. No.
          WIT. That is, you trust me with it?
          LUC. True, true.
          WIT. But if ever I trust you with it again,
        Would I might be truss’d up[111] for my labour!
                          [_Aside._

          LUC. You can all witness, gentlemen; and you, sir
        yeoman?
          HOST. My life for yours, sir, now, I know my mistress’s
        mind so[112] well toward your nephew, let things be in
        preparation, and I’ll train her hither in most excellent
        fashion.           _Exit._
          LUC. A good old boy!—Wife! Jenny!

                        _Enter_ MISTRESS LUCRE.

          MIS. L. What’s the news, sir?
          LUC. The wedding-day’s at hand: prithee, sweet wife,
        express thy housewifery; thou’rt a fine cook, I know’t;
        thy first husband married thee out of an alderman’s
        kitchen; go to, he raised thee for raising of paste.
        What! here’s none but friends; most of our beginnings
        must be winked at.—Gentlemen, I invite you all to my
        nephew’s wedding against Thursday morning.
          FIRST G. With all our hearts, and we shall joy to see
        Your enemy so mock’d.
          LUC. He laugh’d at me, gentlemen; ha, ha, ha!
                                     [_Exeunt all but_ WITGOOD.
          WIT. He has no conscience, faith, would laugh at them;
        They laugh at one another;
        Who then can be so cruel? troth, not I;
        I rather pity now, than ought envy:[113]
        I do conceive such joy in mine own happiness,
        I have no leisure yet to laugh at their follies.
        Thou soul of my estate, I kiss thee!
                                            [_To the mortgage._

        I miss life’s comfort when I miss thee;
        O, never will we part agen,[114]
        Until I leave the sight of men!
        We’ll ne’er trust conscience of our kin,
        Since cozenage brings that title in.             [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                              _A Street._

                        _Enter Three Creditors._

          FIRST C. I’ll wait these seven hours but I’ll see him
           caught.
          SEC. C. Faith, so will I.
          THIRD C. Hang him, prodigal! he’s stript of the widow.
          FIRST C. A’ my troth, she’s the wiser; she has made the
        happier choice: and I wonder of what stuff those widows’
        hearts are made of, that will marry unfledged boys
        before comely thrum-chinned[115] gentlemen.

                              _Enter Boy._

          BOY. News, news, news!
          FIRST C. What, boy?
          BOY. The rioter is caught.
          FIRST C. So, so, so, so! it warms me at the heart;
        I love a’ life[116] to see dogs upon men.
        O, here he comes.

             _Enter Sergeants, with_ WITGOOD _in custody_.

          WIT. My last joy was so great, it took away the sense
        of all future afflictions. What a day is here o’ercast!
        how soon a black tempest rises!
          FIRST C. O, we may speak with you now, sir! what’s
        become of your rich widow? I think you may cast your cap
        at the widow, may you not, sir?
          SEC. C. He a rich widow? who, a prodigal, a daily
        rioter, and a nightly vomiter? he a widow of account? he
        a hole i’ th’ counter.[117]
          WIT. You do well, my masters, to tyrannise over misery,
        to afflict the afflicted: ’tis a custom you have here
        amongst you; I would wish you never leave it, and I hope
        you’ll do as I bid you.
          FIRST C. Come, come, sir, what say you extempore now
        to your bill of a hundred pound? a sweet debt for
        froating[118] your doublets.
          SEC. C. Here’s mine of forty.
          THIRD C. Here’s mine of fifty.
          WIT. Pray, sirs,—you’ll give me breath?
          FIRST C. No, sir, we’ll keep you out of breath still;
        then we shall be sure you will not run away from us.
          WIT. Will you but hear me speak?
          SEC. C. You shall pardon us for that, sir; we know you
        have too fair a tongue of your own; you overcame us too
        lately, a shame take you! we are like to lose all that
        for want of witnesses: we dealt in policy then; always
        when we strive to be most politic we prove most
        coxcombs: _non plus ultra_ I perceive by us, we’re not
        ordained to thrive by wisdom, and therefore we must be
        content to be tradesmen.
          WIT. Give me but reasonable time, and I protest I’ll
        make you ample satisfaction.
          FIRST C. Do you talk of reasonable time to us?
          WIT. ’Tis true, beasts know no reasonable time.
          SEC. C. We must have either money or carcass.
          WIT. Alas, what good will my carcass do you?
          THIRD C. O, ’tis a secret delight we have amongst us! we
        that are used to keep birds in cages, have the heart to
        keep men in prison, I warrant you.
          WIT. I perceive I must crave a little more aid from my
        wits: do but make shift for me this once, and I’ll
        forswear ever to trouble you in the like fashion
        hereafter; I’ll have better employment for you, and[119]
        I live. [_Aside._]—You’ll give me leave, my masters, to
        make trial of my friends, and raise all means I can?
          FIRST C. That’s our desire,[120] sir.

                             _Enter Host._

          HOST. Master Witgood.
          WIT. O, art thou come?
          HOST. May I speak one word with you in private, sir?
          WIT. No, by my faith, canst thou; I am in hell here, and
        the devils will not let me come to thee.
          FIRST C.[121] Do you call us devils? you shall find us
        puritans.—Bear him away; let ’em talk as they go; we’ll
        not stand to hear ’em.—Ah, sir, am I a devil? I shall
        think the better of myself as long as I live: a devil,
        i’faith!
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE IV.


                      _A Room in_ HOARD’S _House_.

                             _Enter_ HOARD.

          HOA. What a sweet blessing hast thou, master Hoard,
        above a multitude! wilt thou never be thankful? how dost
        thou think to be blest another time? or dost thou count
        this the full measure of thy happiness? by my troth, I
        think thou dost: not only a wife large in possessions,
        but spacious in content; she’s rich, she’s young, she’s
        fair, she’s wise: when I wake, I think of her lands—that
        revives me; when I go to bed, I dream of her beauty—and
        that’s enough for me: she’s worth four hundred a-year in
        her very smock, if a man knew how to use it. But the
        journey will be all, in troth, into the country; to ride
        to her lands in state and order following; my brother,
        and other worshipful gentlemen, whose companies I ha’
        sent down for already, to ride along with us in their
        goodly decorum beards, their broad velvet cassocks, and
        chains of gold twice or thrice double; against which
        time I’ll entertain some ten men of mine own into
        liveries, all of occupations or qualities; I will not
        keep an idle man about me: the sight of which will so
        vex my adversary Lucre—for we’ll pass by his door of
        purpose, make a little stand for [the] nonce,[122] and
        have our horses curvet before the window—certainly he
        will never endure it, but run up and hang himself
        presently.

                            _Enter Servant._

        How now, sirrah, what news? any that offer their service
        to me yet?
          SER. Yes, sir, there are some i’ th’ hall that wait for
        your worship’s liking, and desire to be entertained.
          HOA. Are they of occupation?
          SER. They are men fit for your worship, sir.
          HOA. Sayest so? send ’em all in. [_Exit Servant._]—To
        see ten men ride after me in watchet[123] liveries, with
        orange-tawny capes,[124]—’twill cut his comb, i’faith.

             _Enter Tailor, Barber, Perfumer, Falconer, and
                               Huntsman._

        How now? of what occupation are you, sir?
          TAI. A tailor, an’t please your worship.
          HOA. A tailor? O, very good: you shall serve to make all
        the liveries.—What are you, sir?
          BAR. A barber, sir.
          HOA. A barber? very needful: you shall shave all the
        house, and, if need require, stand for a reaper i’ th’
        summer time.—You, sir?
          PER. A perfumer.
          HOA. I smelt you before: perfumers, of all men, had need
        carry themselves uprightly; for if they were once
        knaves, they would be smelt out quickly.—To you, sir?
          FAL. A falconer, an’t please your worship.
          HOA. Sa ho, sa ho, sa ho!—And you, sir?
          HUNT. A huntsman, sir.
          HOA. There, boy, there, boy, there, boy! I am not so
        old but I have pleasant days to come. I promise
        you, my masters, I take such a good liking to you,
        that I entertain you all; I put you already into my
        countenance, and you shall be shortly in my livery; but
        especially you two, my jolly falconer and my bonny
        huntsman; we shall have most need of you at my wife’s
        manor-houses i’ th’ country; there’s goodly parks and
        champion[125] grounds for you; we shall have all our
        sports within ourselves; all the gentlemen a’ th’
        country shall be beholding[126] to us and our pastimes.
          FAL. And we’ll make your worship admire, sir.
          HOA. Sayest thou so? do but make me admire, and thou
        shalt want for nothing.—My tailor.
          TAI. Anon, sir.
          HOA. Go presently in hand with the liveries.
          TAI. I will, sir.
          HOA. My barber.
          BAR. Here, sir.
          HOA. Make ’em all trim fellows, louse ’em well,—
        especially my huntsman,—and cut all their beards of the
        Polonian fashion.—My perfumer.
          PER. Under your nose, sir.
          HOA. Cast a better savour upon the knaves, to take
        away the scent of my tailor’s feet, and my barber’s
        lotium-water.
          PER. It shall be carefully performed, sir.
          HOA. But you, my falconer and huntsman, the welcomest
        men alive, i’faith!
          HUNT. And we’ll shew you that, sir, shall deserve your
        worship’s favour.
          HOA. I prithee, shew me that.—Go, you knaves all, and
        wash your lungs i’ th’ buttery, go. [_Exeunt Tailor,
        Barber, &c._]—By th’ mass, and well remembered! I’ll ask
        my wife that question.—Wife, mistress Jane Hoard!

                 _Enter Courtesan, altered in apparel._

          COURT. Sir, would you with me?
          HOA. I would but know, sweet wife, which might stand
        best to thy liking, to have the wedding dinner kept here
        or i’ th’ country?
          COURT. Hum:—faith, sir, ’twould like[127] me better
        here; here you were married, here let all rites be
        ended.
          HOA. Could a marquesse[128] give a better answer? Hoard,
        bear thy head aloft, thou’st a wife will advance it.

                      _Enter Host with a letter._

        What haste comes here now? yea, a letter? some dreg of
        my adversary’s malice. Come hither; what’s the news?
          HOST. A thing that concerns my mistress, sir.
                               [_Giving a letter to Courtesan._
          HOA. Why then it concerns me, knave.
          HOST. Ay, and you, knave, too (cry your worship mercy):
        you are both like to come into trouble, I promise you,
        sir; a pre-contract.
          HOA. How? a pre-contract, sayest thou?
          HOST. I fear they have too much proof on’t, sir: old
        Lucre, he runs mad up and down, and will to law as fast
        as he can; young Witgood laid hold on by his creditors,
        he exclaims upon you a’ t’other side, says you have
        wrought his undoing by the injurious detaining of his
        contract.
          HOA. Body a’ me!
          HOST. He will have utmost satisfaction;
        The law shall give him recompense, he says.
          COURT. Alas, his creditors so merciless! my state being
        yet uncertain, I deem it not unconscionable to further
        him.                                           [_Aside._
          HOST. True, sir.
          HOA. Wife, what says that letter? let me construe it.
          COURT. Curs’d be my rash and unadvised words!
                          [_Tears the letter and stamps on it._
        I’ll set my foot upon my tongue,
        And tread my inconsiderate grant to dust.
          HOA. Wife——
          HOST. A pretty shift, i’faith! I commend a woman when
        she can make away a letter from her husband handsomely,
        and this was cleanly done, by my troth.        [_Aside._
          COURT. I did, sir;
        Some foolish words I must confess did pass,
        Which now litigiously he fastens on me.
          HOA. Of what force? let me examine ’em.
          COURT. Too strong, I fear: would I were well freed of
             him!
          HOA. Shall I compound?
          COURT. No, sir, I’d have it done some nobler way
        Of your side; I’d have you come off with honour;
        Let baseness keep with them. Why, have you not
        The means, sir? the occasion’s offer’d you.
          HOA. Where? how, dear wife?
          COURT. He is now caught by his creditors; the slave’s
        needy; his debts petty; he’ll rather bind himself to all
        inconveniences than rot in prison: by this only means
        you may get a release from him: ’tis not yet come to his
        uncle’s hearing; send speedily for the creditors; by
        this time he’s desperate; he’ll set his hand to any
        thing: take order for his debts, or discharge ’em quite:
        a pax[129] on him, let’s be rid of a rascal!
          HOA. Excellent!
        Thou dost astonish me.—Go, run, make haste;
        Bring both the creditors and Witgood hither.
          HOST. This will be some revenge yet.
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          HOA. In the mean space I’ll have a release drawn.—Within
        there!

                            _Enter Servant._

          SER. Sir?
          HOA. Sirrah, come take directions; go to my scrivener.
          COURT. [_aside; while_ HOARD _gives directions to the
        servant_] I’m yet like those whose riches lie in dreams,
        If I be wak’d, they’re false; such is my fate,
        Who venture[130] deeper than the desperate state.
        Though I have sinn’d, yet could I become new,
        For where I once vow, I am ever true.
          HOA. Away, despatch, on my displeasure quickly.
                                               [_Exit Servant._
        Happy occasion! pray heaven he be in the right vein now
        to set his hand to’t, that nothing alter him; grant that
        all his follies may meet in him at once, to besot him
        enough! I pray for him, i’faith, and here he comes.

                    _Enter_ WITGOOD _and Creditors_.

          WIT. What would you with me now, my uncle’s spiteful
        adversary?
          HOA. Nay, I am friends.
          WIT. Ay, when your mischief’s spent.
          HOA. I heard, you were arrested.
          WIT. Well, what then? you will pay none of my debts, I
        am sure.
          HOA. A wise man cannot tell;
        There may be those conditions ’greed upon
        May move me to do much.
          WIT. Ay, when?—
        ’Tis thou, perjurèd woman! (O, no name
        Is vild[131] enough to match thy treachery!)
        That art the cause of my confusion.
          COURT. Out, you penurious slave!
          HOA. Nay, wife, you are too froward;
        Let him alone; give losers leave to talk.
          WIT. Shall I remember thee of another promise
        Far stronger than the first?
          COURT. I’d fain know that.
          WIT. ’Twould call shame to thy cheeks.
          COURT. Shame?
          WIT. Hark in your ear.—
        Will he come off, think’st thou, and pay   ┐
        my debts roundly?                          │
          COURT. Doubt nothing; there’s a          │
        release a-drawing and all, to which you    │
        must set your hand.                        │
          WIT. Excellent!                          │ _They_
          COURT. But methinks, i’faith,            │ _converse_
        you might have made some shift to dis-     │ _apart_
        charge this yourself, having in the mort-  │
        gage, and never have burdened my conscience│
        with it.                                   │
          WIT. A’ my troth, I could not,           │
        for my creditors’ cruelties extend to the  │
        present.                                   │
          COURT. No more.                          │
        Why, do your worst for that, I defy you.   ┘
          WIT. You’re impudent; I’ll call up witnesses.
          COURT. Call up thy wits, for thou hast been devoted
        To follies a long time.
          HOA. Wife, you’re too bitter.— Master Witgood, and you,
        my masters, you shall hear a mild speech come from me
        now, and this it is: ’t has been my fortune, gentlemen,
        to have an extraordinary blessing poured upon me a’
        late, and here she stands; I have wedded her, and bedded
        her, and yet she is little the worse: some foolish words
        she hath passed to you in the country, and some
        peevish[132] debts you owe here in the city; set the
        hare’s head to the goose-giblet,[133] release you her of
        her words, and I’ll release you of your debts, sir.
          WIT. Would you so? I thank you for that, sir; I cannot
        blame you, i’faith.
          HOA. Why, are not debts better than words, sir?
          WIT. Are not words promises, and are not promises debts,
        sir?
          HOA. He plays at back-racket with me.       [_Aside._
          FIRST C. Come hither, master Witgood, come hither; be
        ruled by fools once.
          SEC. C. We are citizens, and know what belong[s] to’t.
          FIRST C. Take hold of his offer: pax[134] on her, let
        her go; if your debts were once discharged, I would help
        you to a widow myself worth ten of her.
          THIRD C. Mass, partner, and now you remember me on’t,
        there’s master Mulligrub’s sister newly fallen a widow.
          FIRST C. Cuds me, as pat as can be! there’s a widow left
        for you; ten thousand in money, beside plate, jewels,
        _et cetera_ : I warrant it a match; we can do all in all
        with her; prithee, despatch; we’ll carry thee to her
        presently.
          WIT. My uncle will ne’er endure me when he shall hear I
        set my hand to a release.
          SEC. C. Hark, I’ll tell thee a trick for that: I have
        spent five hundred pound in suits in my time, I should
        be wise; thou’rt now a prisoner; make a release; take’t
        of my word, whatsoever a man makes as long as he is in
        durance, ’tis nothing in law, not thus much.
                                          [_Snaps his fingers._
          WIT. Say you so, sir?
          THIRD C. I have paid for’t, I know’t.
          WIT. Proceed then; I consent.
          THIRD C. Why, well said.
          HOA. How now, my masters, what have you done with him?
          FIRST C. With much ado, sir, we have got him to consent.
          HOA. Ah—a—a! and what come[135] his debts to now?
          FIRST C. Some eight score odd pounds, sir.
          HOA. Naw, naw, naw, naw, naw! tell me the second time;
        give me a lighter sum; they are but desperate debts, you
        know; ne’er called in but upon such an accident; a poor,
        needy knave, he would starve and rot in prison: come,
        come, you shall have ten shillings in the pound, and the
        sum down roundly.
          FIRST C. You must make it a mark,[136] sir.
          HOA. Go to then, tell your money in the meantime; you
        shall find little less there. [_Giving them money._]—
        Come, master Witgood, you are so unwilling to do
        yourself good now!

                           _Enter Scrivener._

        Welcome, honest scrivener.—Now you shall hear the
        release read.
          SCRI. [_reads_] _Be it known to all men, by these
        presents, that I, Theodorus Witgood, gentleman, sole
        nephew to Pecunius Lucre, having unjustly made title and
        claim to one Jane Medler, late widow of Anthony Medler,
        and now wife to Walkadine Hoard, in consideration of a
        competent sum of money to discharge my debts, do for
        ever hereafter disclaim any title, right, estate, or
        interest in or to the said widow, late in the occupation
        of the said Anthony Medler, and now in the occupation of
        Walkadine Hoard; as also neither to lay claim by
        virtue of any former contract, grant, promise, or
        demise, to any of her manor[s], manor-houses, parks,
        groves, meadow-grounds, arable lands, barns, stacks,
        stables, dove-holes, and coney-burrows; together
        with all her cattle, money, plate, jewels, borders,
        chains, bracelets, furnitures, hangings, moveables or
        immoveables._[137] _In witness whereof, I the said
        Theodorus Witgood have interchangeably set to my hand
        and seal before these presents, the day and date above
        written._
          WIT. What a precious fortune hast thou slipt here, like
        a beast as thou art!
          HOA. Come, unwilling heart, come.
          WIT. Well, master Hoard, give me the pen; I see
        ’Tis vain to quarrel with our destiny.
                                            [_Signs the paper._

          HOA. O, as vain a thing as can be! you cannot commit a
        greater absurdity, sir. So, so; give me that hand now;
        before all these presents, I am friends for ever with
        thee.
          WIT. Troth, and it were pity of my heart now, if I
        should bear you any grudge, i’faith.
          HOA. Content: I’ll send for thy uncle against the
        wedding dinner; we will be friends once again.
          WIT. I hope to bring it to pass myself, sir.
          HOA. How now? is’t right, my masters?
          FIRST C. ’Tis something wanting, sir; yet it shall be
        sufficient.
          HOA. Why, well said; a good conscience makes a fine shew
        now-a-days. Come, my masters, you shall all taste of my
        wine ere you depart.
          ALL THE CRED. We follow you, sir.
                               [_Exeunt_ HOARD _and Scrivener_.
          WIT. I’ll try these fellows now. [_Aside._]—A word, sir:
        what, will you carry me to that widow now?
          FIRST C. Why, do you think we were in earnest, i’faith?
        carry you to a rich widow? we should get much credit by
        that: a noted rioter! a contemptible prodigal! ’twas a
        trick we have amongst us to get in our money: fare you
        well, sir.                         [_Exeunt Creditors._
          WIT. Farewell, and be hanged, you short pig-haired,
        ram-headed rascals! he that believes in you shall ne’er
        be saved, I warrant him. By this new league I shall have
        some access[138] unto my love.

                         JOYCE _appears above_.

          JOYCE. Master Witgood!
          WIT. My life!
          JOYCE. Meet me presently; that note directs you [_throws
        him a letter_]: I would not be suspected: our happiness
        attends us: farewell.
          WIT. A word’s enough.            [_Exeunt severally._


                                SCENE V.


                        DAMPIT’S _Bed-chamber_.

              DAMPIT _in bed_; AUDREY _spinning by; Boy_.
          AUD. [_singing_]
        _Let the usurer cram him, in interest that excel,
        There’s pits enow to damn him before he comes to hell;
        In Holborn some, in Fleet Street some,
        Where’er he come there’s some, there’s some._
          DAMP. _Trahe_ , _trahito_ , draw the curtain; give me a
        sip of sack more.

           _While he drinks, enter_ LAMPREY _and_ SPICHCOCK.

          LAM. Look you; did not I tell you he lay like the devil
        in chains, when he was bound for a thousand year?[139]
          SPI. But I think[140] the devil had no steel bed-staffs;
        he goes beyond him for that.
          LAM. Nay, do but mark the conceit of his drinking; one
        must wipe his mouth for him with a muckinder,[141] do
        you see, sir?
          SPI. Is this the sick trampler?[142] why, he is only
        bed-rid with drinking.
          LAM. True, sir. He spies us.
          DAM. What, Sir Tristram? you come and see a weak man
        here, a very weak man.
          LAM. If you be weak in body, you should be strong in
        prayer, sir.
          DAM. O, I have prayed too much, poor man!
          LAM. There’s a taste of his soul for you!
          SPI. Faugh, loathsome!
          LAM. I come to borrow a hundred pound of you, sir.
          DAM. Alas, you come at an ill time! I cannot spare it,
        i’faith; I ha’ but two thousand i’ th’ house.
          AUD. Ha, ha, ha!
          DAM. Out, you gernative quean, the mullipood of villany,
        the spinner of concupiscency!

                  _Enter_ SIR LAUNCELOT, _and others_.

          SIR L. Yea, gentlemen, are you here before us? how is
        he now?
          LAM. Faith, the same man still: the tavern bitch has bit
        him i’ th’ head.[143]
          SIR L. We shall have the better sport with him: peace.—
        And how cheers master Dampit now?
          DAM. O, my bosom Sir Launcelot, how cheer I! thy
        presence is restorative.
          SIR L. But I hear a great complaint of you, master
        Dampit, among gallants.
          DAM. I am glad of that, i’faith: prithee, what?
          SIR L. They say you are waxed proud a’ late, and if a
        friend visit you in the afternoon, you’ll scarce know
        him.
          DAM. Fie, fie; proud? I cannot remember any such thing:
        sure I was drunk then.
          SIR L. Think you so, sir?
          DAM. There ’twas, i’faith; nothing but the pride of the
        sack; and so certify ’em.—Fetch sack, sirrah.
          BOY. A vengeance sack you once!
                      [_Exit, and returns presently with sack._
          AUD. Why, master Dampit, if you hold on as you begin,
        and lie a little longer, you need not take care how to
        dispose your wealth; you’ll make the vintner your heir.
          DAM. Out, you babliaminy, you unfeathered, cremitoried
        quean, you cullisance of scabiosity!
          AUD. Good words, master Dampit, to speak before a maid
        and a virgin!
          DAM. Hang thy virginity upon the pole of carnality!
          AUD. Sweet terms! my mistress shall know ’em.
          LAM. Note but the misery of this usuring slave: here he
        lies, like a noisome dunghill, full of the poison of his
        drunken blasphemies; and they to whom he bequeaths all,
        grudge him the very meat that feeds him, the very pillow
        that eases him. Here may a usurer behold his end: what
        profits it to be a slave in this world, and a devil i’
        th’ next?
          DAM. Sir Launcelot, let me buss thee, Sir Launcelot;
        thou art the only friend that I honour and respect.
          SIR L. I thank you for that, master Dampit.
          DAM. Farewell, my bosom Sir Launcelot.
          SIR L. Gentlemen, and[144] you love me, let me step
        behind you, and one of you fall a-talking of me to him.
          LAM. Content.—Master Dampit——
          DAM. So, sir.
          LAM. Here came Sir Launcelot to see you e’en now.
          DAM. Hang him, rascal!
          LAM. Who? Sir Launcelot?
          DAM. Pythagorical rascal!
          LAM. Pythagorical?
          DAM. Ay, he changes[145] his cloak when he meets a
        sergeant.
          SIR L. What a rogue’s this!
          LAM. I wonder you can rail at him, sir; he comes in love
        to see you.
          DAM. A louse for his love! his father was a comb-maker;
        I have no need of his crawling love: he comes to have
        longer day,[146] the superlative rascal!
          SIR L. ’Sfoot, I can no longer endure the rogue!—Master
        Dampit, I come to take my leave once again, sir.
          DAM. Who? my dear and kind Sir Launcelot, the only
        gentleman of England? let me hug thee: farewell, and a
        thousand.[147]
          LAM. Compos’d of wrongs and slavish flatteries!
          SIR L. Nay, gentlemen, he shall shew you more tricks
        yet; I’ll give you another taste of him.
          LAM. Is’t possible?
          SIR L. His memory is upon departing.
          DAM. Another cup of sack!
          SIR L. Mass, then ’twill be quite gone! Before he drink
        that, tell him there’s a country client come up, and
        here attends for his learned advice.
          LAM. Enough.
          DAM. One cup more, and then let the bell toll: I hope I
        shall be weak enough by that time.
          LAM. Master Dampit——
          DAM. Is the sack spouting?
          LAM. ’Tis coming forward, sir. Here’s a country man, a
        client of yours, waits for your deep and profound
        advice, sir.
          DAM. A coxcombry, where is he? let him approach: set me
        up a peg higher.
          LAM. [_to_ SIR LAUN.] You must draw near, sir.
          DAM. Now, good man fooliaminy, what say you to me now?
          SIR L. Please your good worship, I am a poor man, sir——
          DAM. What make you in my chamber then?
          SIR L. I would entreat your worship’s device[148] in a
        just and honest cause, sir.
          DAM. I meddle with no such matters; I refer ’em to
        master No-man’s office.
          SIR L. I had but one house left me in all the world,
        sir, which was my father’s, my grandfather’s, my
        great-grandfather’s, and now a villain has unjustly
        wrung me out, and took possession on’t.
          DAM. Has he such feats? Thy best course is to bring thy
        _ejectione firmæ_ , and in seven year thou mayst shove
        him out by the law.
          SIR L. Alas, an’t please your worship, I have small
        friends and less money!
          DAM. Hoyday! this geer will fadge well:[149] hast no
        money? why, then, my advice is, thou must set fire a’
        th’ house, and so get him out.
          LAM. That will break strife, indeed.
          SIR L. I thank your worship for your hot counsel,
        sir.—Altering but my voice a little, you see he knew
        me not: you may observe by this, that a drunkard’s
        memory holds longer in the voice than in the person.
        But, gentlemen, shall I shew you a sight? Behold the
        little dive-dapper[150] of damnation, Gulf the usurer,
        for his time worse than t’other.
          LAM. What’s he comes with him?
          SIR L. Why Hoard, that married lately the widow Medler.
          LAM. O, I cry you mercy, sir.

                       _Enter_ HOARD _and_ GULF.

          HOA. Now, gentlemen visitants, how does master Dampit?
          SIR L. Faith, here he lies, e’en drawing in, sir, good
        canary as fast as he can, sir; a very weak creature
        truly, he is almost past memory.
          HOA. Fie, master Dampit! you lie lazing a-bed here, and
        I come to invite you to my wedding-dinner: up, up, up!
          DAM. Who’s this? master Hoard? who hast thou married, in
        the name of foolery?
          HOA. A rich widow.
          DAM. A Dutch widow?[151]
          HOA. A rich widow; one widow Medler.
          DAM. Medler? she keeps open house.
          HOA. She did, I can tell you, in her t’other husband’s
        days; open house for all comers; horse and man was
        welcome, and room enough for ’em all.
          DAM. There’s too much for thee then; thou mayst let out
        some to thy neighbours.
          GULF. What, hung alive in chains? O spectacle!
        bed-staffs of steel? _O monstrum horrendum, informe,
        ingens, cui lumen ademptum!_ [152] O Dampit, Dampit,
        here’s a just judgment shewn upon usury, extortion, and
        trampling[153] villany!
          SIR L. This [is] excellent, thief rails upon the thief!
          GULF. Is this the end of cut-throat usury, brothel, and
        blasphemy? now mayst thou see what race a usurer runs.
          DAM. Why, thou rogue of universality, do not I know
        thee? thy sound is like the cuckoo, the Welch
        ambassador:[154] thou cowardly slave, that offers to
        fight with a sick man when his weapon’s down! rail upon
        me in my naked bed? why, thou great Lucifer’s little
        vicar! I am not so weak but I know a knave at first
        sight: thou inconscionable rascal! thou that goest upon
        Middlesex juries, and wilt make haste to give up thy
        verdict[155] because thou wilt not lose thy dinner! Are
        you answered?
          GULF. An’t were not for shame——  [_Draws his dagger._
          DAM. Thou wouldst be hanged then.
          LAM. Nay, you must exercise patience, master Gulf,
        always in a sick man’s chamber.
          SIR L. He’ll quarrel with none, I warrant you, but those
        that are bed-rid.
          DAM. Let him come, gentlemen, I am armed: reach my
        close-stool hither.
          SIR L. Here will be a sweet fray anon; I’ll leave you,
        gentlemen.
          LAM. Nay, we’ll along with you.—Master Gulf——
          GULF. Hang him, usuring rascal!
          SIR L. Push,[156] set your strength to his, your wit to
        his!
          AUD. Pray, gentlemen, depart; his hour’s come upon him.—
        Sleep in my bosom, sleep.
          SIR L. Nay, we have enough of him, i’faith; keep him
             for the house.
        Now make your best:[157]
        For thrice his wealth I would not have his breast.

          GULF. A little thing would make me beat him now he’s
        asleep.
          SIR L. Mass, then ’twill be a pitiful day when he wakes!
        I would be loath to see that day: come.
          GULF. You overrule me, gentlemen, i’faith. [_Exeunt._


                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                      _A Room in_ LUCRE’S _House_.

                      _Enter_ LUCRE _and_ WITGOOD.
          WIT. Nay, uncle, let me prevail with you so much;
        I’faith, go, now he has invited you.
          LUC. I shall have great joy there when he has borne away
        the widow!
          WIT. Why, la, I thought where I should find you
        presently: uncle, a’ my troth, ’tis nothing so.
          LUC. What’s nothing so, sir? is not he married to the
        widow?
          WIT. No, by my troth, is he not, uncle.
          LUC. How?
          WIT. Will you have the truth on’t? he is married to a
        whore, i’faith.
          LUC. I should laugh at that.
          WIT. Uncle, let me perish in your favour if you find it
        not so; and that ’tis I that have married the honest
        woman.
          LUC. Ha! I’d walk ten mile a’ foot to see that, i’faith.
          WIT. And see’t you shall, or I’ll ne’er see you again.
          LUC. A quean, i’faith? ha, ha, ha!         [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                      _A Room in_ HOARD’S _House_.

        _Enter_ HOARD _tasting wine, Host following in a livery
                                cloak_.
          HOA. Pup, pup, pup, pup, I like not this wine: is there
        never a better tierce in the house?
          HOST. Yes, sir, there are as good tierce[s] in the house
        as any are in England.
          HOA. Desire your mistress, you knave, to taste ’em all
        over; she has better skill.
          HOST. Has she so? the better for her, and the worse for
        you.                                 [_Aside, and exit._
          HOA. Arthur!

                            _Enter_ ARTHUR.

        Is the cupboard of plate set out?[158]
          ARTH. All’s in order, sir.                    [_Exit._
          HOA. I am in love with my liveries every time I think on
        ’em; they make a gallant shew, by my troth. Niece!

                             _Enter_ JOYCE.

          JOYCE. Do you call, sir?
          HOA. Prithee, shew a little diligence, and overlook the
        knaves a little; they’ll filch and steal today, and send
        whole pasties home to their wives: and[159] thou be’st a
        good niece, do not see me purloined.
          JOYCE. Fear it not, sir—I have cause: though the
        feast be prepared for you, yet it serves fit for my
        wedding-dinner too.[160]            [_Aside, and exit._

                    _Enter_ LAMPREY _and_ SPICHCOCK.

          HOA. Master Lamprey and master Spichcock, two the most
        welcome gentlemen alive! your fathers and mine were all
        free a’ th’ fishmongers.
          LAM. They were indeed, sir. You see bold guests, sir;
        soon entreated.
          HOA. And that’s best, sir.

                            _Enter Servant._

        How now, sirrah?
          SER. There’s a coach come to th’ door, sir.  [_Exit._
          HOA. My Lady Foxtone, a’ my life!—Mistress Jane Hoard!
        wife!—Mass, ’tis her ladyship indeed!

                         _Enter_ LADY FOXTONE.

        Madam, you are welcome to an unfurnished house, dearth
        of cheer, scarcity of attendance.
          L. FOX. You are pleased to make the worst, sir.
          HOA. Wife!

                           _Enter Courtesan._

          L. FOX. Is this your bride?
          HOA. Yes, madam.—Salute my Lady Foxtone.
          COURT. Please you, madam, awhile to taste the air in the
        garden?
          L. FOX. ’Twill please us well.
                          [_Exeunt_ L. FOXTONE _and Courtesan_.
          HOA. Who would not wed? the most delicious life!
        No joys are like the comforts of a wife.
          LAM. So we bachelors think, that are not troubled with
        them.

                          _Re-enter Servant._

          SER. Your worship’s brother, with other ancient
        gentlemen,[161] are newly alighted, sir.        [_Exit._
          HOA. Master Onesiphorus Hoard? why, now our company
        begins to come in.

             _Enter_ ONESIPHORUS HOARD, LIMBER, _and_ KIX.

        My dear and kind brother, welcome, i’faith.
          ONES. H. You see we are men at an hour, brother.
          HOA. Ay, I’ll say that for you, brother; you keep as
        good an hour to come to a feast as any gentleman in the
        shire.—What, old master Limber and master Kix! do we
        meet, i’faith, jolly gentlemen?
          LIM. We hope you lack guess,[162] sir?
          HOA. O, welcome, welcome! we lack still such guess as
        your worships.
          ONES. H. Ah, sirrah brother, have you catched up widow
        Medler?
          HOA. From ’em all, brother; and I may tell you I had
        mighty enemies, those that stuck sore; old Lucre is a
        sore fox, I can tell you, brother.
          ONES. H. Where is she? I’ll go seek her out: I long to
        have a smack at her lips.
          HOA. And most wishfully, brother, see where she comes.

                 _Re-enter Courtesan and_ LADY FOXTONE.

        Give her a smack[163] now we may hear it all the house
        over.  [_Courtesan and_ ONES. H. _start and turn away_.
          COURT. O heaven, I am betray’d! I know that face.
          HOA. Ha, ha, ha! why, how now? are you both ashamed?—
        Come, gentlemen, we’ll look another way.
          ONES. H. Nay, brother, hark you: come, you’re disposed
        to be merry.
          HOA. Why do we meet else, man?
          ONES. H. That’s another matter: I was ne’er so ’fraid in
        my life but that you had been in earnest.
          HOA. How mean you, brother?
          ONES. H. You said she was your wife.
          HOA. Did I so? by my troth, and so she is.
          ONES. H. By your troth, brother?
          HOA. What reason have I to dissemble with my friends,
        brother? if marriage can make her mine, she is mine.
        Why——          [ONESIPHORUS HOARD _is about to retire_. ONES.
        H. Troth, I am not well of a sudden: I must crave
        pardon, brother; I came to see you, but I cannot stay
        dinner, i’faith.
          HOA. I hope you will not serve me so, brother?
          LIM. By your leave, master Hoard——
          HOA. What now? what now? pray, gentlemen:—you were wont
        to shew yourselves wise men.
          LIM. But you have shewn your folly too much here.
          HOA. How?
          KIX. Fie, fie! a man of your repute and name!
        You’ll feast your friends, but cloy ’em first with
           shame.
          HOA. This grows too deep; pray, let us reach the
             sense.
          LIM. In your old age doat on a courtesan!
          HOA. Ha!
          KIX. Marry a strumpet!
          HOA. Gentlemen!
          ONES. H. And Witgood’s quean!
          HOA. O! nor lands nor living?
          ONES. H. Living!
          HOA. [_to Courtesan_] Speak.
          COURT. Alas, you know, at first, sir,
        I told you I had nothing!
          HOA. Out, out! I am cheated; infinitely cozen’d!
          LIM. Nay, master Hoard——

                  _Enter_ LUCRE, WITGOOD, _and_ JOYCE.

          HOA. A Dutch widow![164] a Dutch widow! a Dutch widow!
          LUC. Why, nephew, shall I trace thee still a liar?
        Wilt make me mad? is not yon thing the widow?
          WIT. Why, la, you are so hard a’ belief, uncle! by my
        troth, she’s a whore.
          LUC. Then thou’rt a knave.
          WIT. _Negatur argumentum_, uncle.
          LUC. _Probo tibi_, nephew: he that knows a woman to be a
        quean must needs be a knave; thou sayst thou knowest her
        to be one; _ergo_ , if she be a quean, thou’rt a knave.
          WIT. _Negatur sequela majoris_, uncle; he that knows a
        woman to be a quean must needs be a knave; I deny that.
          HOA. Lucre and Witgood, you’re both villains; get you
        out of my house!
          LUC. Why, didst not invite me to thy wedding-dinner?
          WIT. And are not you and I sworn perpetual friends
        before witness, sir, and were both drunk upon’t?
          HOA. Daintily abus’d! you’ve put a junt[165] upon me!
          LUC. Ha, ha, ha!
          HOA. A common strumpet!
          WIT. Nay, now
        You wrong her, sir; if I were she, I’d have
        The law on you for that; I durst depose for her
        She ne’er had common use nor common thought.
          COURT. Despise me, publish me, I am your wife;
        What shame can I have now but you’ll have part?
        If in disgrace you share, I sought not you;
        You pursu’d, nay,[166] forc’d me; had I friends would
           follow it,
        Less than your action has been prov’d a rape.
          ONES. H. Brother!
          COURT. Nor did I ever boast of lands unto you,
        Money, or goods; I took a plainer course,
        And told you true, I’d nothing:
        If error were committed, ’twas by you;
        Thank your own folly: nor has my sin been
        So odious, but worse has been forgiven;
        Nor am I so deform’d, but I may challenge
        The utmost power of any old man’s love.
        She that tastes not sin before [twenty], twenty to one
        but she’ll taste it after: most of you old men are
        content to marry young virgins, and take that which
        follows; where,[167] marrying one of us, you both save a
        sinner and are quit from a cuckold for ever:
        And more, in brief, let this your best thoughts win,
        She that knows sin, knows best how to hate sin.
          HOA. Curs’d be all malice! black are the fruits of
             spite,
        And poison first their owners. O, my friends,
        I must embrace shame, to be rid of shame!
        Conceal’d disgrace prevents a public name.
        Ah, Witgood! ah, Theodorus!
          WIT. Alas, sir, I was pricked in conscience to see her
        well bestowed, and where could I bestow her better than
        upon your pitiful worship? Excepting but myself, I dare
        swear she’s a virgin; and now, by marrying your niece, I
        have banished myself for ever from her: she’s mine aunt
        now, by my faith, and there’s no meddling with mine
        aunt, you know: a sin against my nuncle.[168]
          COURT. Lo, gentlemen, before you all       [_Kneels._
        In true reclaimed form I fall.
        Henceforth for ever I defy[169]
        The glances of a sinful eye,[170]
        Waving of fans (which some suppose
        Tricks of fancy),[171] treading of toes,
        Wringing of fingers, biting the lip,
        The wanton gait, th’ alluring trip;
        All secret friends and private meetings,
        Close-borne letters and bawds’ greetings;
        Feigning excuse to women’s labours
        When we are sent for to th’ next neighbour’s;
        Taking false physic, and ne’er start
        To be let blood though sign[172] be at heart;
        Removing chambers, shifting beds,
        To welcome friends in husbands’ steads,
        Them to enjoy, and you to marry,
        They first serv’d, while you must tarry,
        They to spend, and you to gather,
        They to get, and you to father:
        These, and thousand, thousand more,
        New reclaim’d, I now abhor.
          LUC. [_to_ WITGOOD] Ah, here’s a lesson, rioter, for
             you!
          WIT. I must confess my follies; I’ll down too:
                                                     [_Kneels._
        And here for ever I disclaim
        The cause of youth’s undoing, game,
        Chiefly dice, those true outlanders,
        That shake out beggars, thieves, and panders;
        Soul-wasting surfeits, sinful riots,
        Queans’ evils, doctors’ diets,
        ’Pothecaries’ drugs, surgeons’ glisters;
        Stabbing of arms[173] for a common mistress;
        Riband favours, ribald speeches;
        Dear perfum’d jackets, pennyless breeches;
        Dutch flapdragons, healths in urine;
        Drabs that keep a man too sure in:
        I do defy[174] you all.
        Lend me each honest hand, for here I rise
        A reclaim’d man, loathing the general vice.
          HOA. So, so, all friends! the wedding-dinner cools:
        Who seem most crafty prove ofttimes most fools.
                                               [_Exeunt omnes._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          THE FAMILY OF LOVE.

               _The Familie of Love. Acted by the Children
               of his Maiesties Reuells._

                                _Lectori._

               _Sydera iungamus, facito mihi Iuppiter
                  adsit,
               Et tibi Mercurius noster dabit omnia faxo._

               _At London Printed for John Helmes, and are
               to be sold in Saint Dunstans Churchyard in
               Fleetstreet._ 1608. 4to.

               Though there is undoubtedly but one
               edition of this drama, yet the copies
               differ slightly in several places;
               alterations having been introduced after
               part of the impression had been worked
               off: a circumstance which will surprise
               those persons only who have not been
               accustomed to collate the 4tos of old
               English plays.

               _The Family of Love_ was licensed by Sir
               George Bucke, 12th Oct. 1607: see Chalmers’s
               _Suppl. Apol._ p. 201.

               Concerning the sect which gives the title
               to the play, the following notices will be
               perhaps more than sufficient.

               In Brandt’s _Hist. of the Reform. &c. in the
               Low Countries_, we are told, under the year
               1555: “That Family was suspected of being
               more addicted to carnal than to spiritual
               love. Henry Nicholas, a Westphalian, born at
               Munster, but who had lived a great while at
               Amsterdam, and some time likewise at Embden,
               was father of this Family. He appeared upon
               the stage about the year 1540, stiled
               himself the _deified man_, boasted of great
               matters, and seemed to exalt himself above
               the condition of a human creature. He was,
               as he pretended, greater than Moses and
               Christ, because Moses had taught mankind to
               _hope_, Christ to _believe_, but he to
               _love_; which last being of more worth than
               both the former, he was consequently greater
               than both those prophets.” vol. i. p. 105,
               ed. 1720.

               According to some writers, however, the sect
               was not founded by Henry Nicholas, but by
               David George, an anabaptist of Delft; and
               indeed there seems reason to believe that
               the Family of Love grew out of the heresies
               of George, with whom Nicholas had been on
               intimate terms.

               “As to his [Nicholas’s] pretensions,”
               observes Mosheim, “they were indeed
               visionary and chimerical; for he maintained
               that he had a commission from heaven to
               teach men that the essence of religion
               consisted in the feelings of _divine love_;
               that all other theological tenets, whether
               they related to objects of faith or modes of
               worship, were of no sort of moment; and
               consequently that it was a matter of the
               most perfect indifference what opinions
               Christians entertained concerning the divine
               nature, provided their hearts burned with
               the pure and sacred flame of piety and love.
               To this, his main doctrine, Nicholas may
               have probably added other odd fancies, as
               always is the case with those innovators who
               are endued with a warm and fruitful
               imagination: to come, however, at a true
               notion of the opinions of this enthusiast,
               it will be much easier to consult his own
               writings than to depend entirely upon the
               accounts and refutations of his
               adversaries.” _Eccles. Hist._ (by MACLAINE),
               vol. iv. p. 484.

               “Not content,” says Fuller, “to confine
               his errours to his own country, over he
               [Nicholas] comes into England, and in the
               later end of the reign of Edward the Sixth
               joyned himself to the Dutch congregation
               in London, where he seduced a number of
               artificers and silly women,” &c. _Church
               Hist._ b. ix. p. 112, ed. 1655.

               “The twelfe of June [1575], stood at
               Paules Crosse fiue persons Englishmen,
               of the sect termed the Familie of Loue,
               who there confessed themselues vtterlie
               to detest as well the author of that
               sect H. N. as all his damnable errors
               and heresies.” HOLINSHED’S _Chron._ vol.
               iv. p. 328, ed. 1808.

               Towards the end of 1580, the sect was
               increasing so rapidly in England, that the
               government took active measures for its
               suppression. “The queenes maiestie being
               informed that in sundrie places of this
               realme, certeine persons secretlie taught
               damnable heresies, contrarie to diuers
               principall articles of our beleefe and
               christian faith, who to colour their sect
               named themselues the Familie of Loue, and
               then as manie as were allowed by them to be
               of that familie to be elect and saued, and
               all others, of what church soeuer they be,
               to be reiected and damned. And for that vpon
               conuenting of some of them before the
               bishops and ordinaries, it was found that
               the ground of their sect is mainteined by
               certeine lewd, hereticall, and seditious
               books, first made in the Dutch toong, and
               lastlie translated into English, and printed
               beyond the seas, and secretlie brought ouer
               into the realme, the author whereof they
               name H. N. &c. And considering also it is
               found, that those sectaries held opinion,
               that they may before anie magistrat or
               ecclesiasticall or temporall, or anie other
               person, noi being professed to be of their
               sect, by oth or otherwise denie anie thing
               for their aduantage: so as though manie of
               them are well knowne to be teachers and
               spreaders abroad of these dangerous and
               damnable sects; yet by their owne confession
               they cannot be condemned. Therefore hir
               maiestie being verie sorie to see so great
               an euill, by malice of the diuell to be
               brought into this hir realme, and by hir
               bishops and ordinaries she vnderstandeth it
               verie requisit, not onelie to haue those
               dangerous heretiks and sectaries to be
               seueralie punished; but that also other
               meanes be vsed by hir maiesties roiall
               authoritie, which is giuen hir of God to
               defend Christs church, to root them out from
               further infecting of hir realme: she hath
               thought meet and conuenient, and so by hir
               proclamation commandeth, that all hir
               officers and ministers temporall shall in
               all their seuerall vocations assist the
               bishops of hir realme, and all other person,
               to search out all persons dulie suspected to
               be either teachers or professors of the
               foresaid damnable sects, and by all good
               meanes to proceed seuerelie against them,
               being found culpable, by order of the lawes
               ecclesiasticall or temporall: and that all
               search be made in all places suspected, for
               the books and writings mainteining the said
               heresies and sects, and them to destroie and
               burne, &c: as more at large may appeere by
               the said proclamation, giuen at Richmond the
               third of October, and proclamed at London on
               the nineteenth daie of the same moneth
               [1580].” HOLINSHED’S _Chron._ vol. iv. p.
               432, ed. 1808. See also CAMDENI _Annales_,
               p. 318, ed. 1639.

               A list of Nicholas’s numerous writings may
               be found in Lowndes’s _Bibliographer’s
               Manual_. One of them is in verse: _An
               Enterlude of Myndes: witnessing the Mans
               Fall from God and Christ. Set forth by H. N.
               and by him newly perused and amended.
               Translated out of Base-Almayne into
               English._ n. d.: see an account of, and
               extracts from it, in Sir E. Brydges’s
               _Restituta_, vol. iv. p. 140, sqq. Nicholas
               is mentioned in the last scene of _The
               Alchemist_,—B. JONSON’S _Works_, vol. iv. p.
               187, ed. Giff.

               “The Family of Love (or Lust rather),” says
               Fuller, “at this time [1604] presented a
               tedious Petition to King James, so that it
               is questionable whether his majesty ever
               graced it with his perusall, wherein they
               endeavoured to cleare themselves from some
               misrepresentations, and by fawning
               expression to insinuate themselves into his
               majesty’s good opinion.” _Church Hist._ b.
               x. p. 29, ed. 1655. Having given the
               document in question, which is too long for
               insertion here, Fuller proceeds: “I finde
               not what effect this their Petition
               produced; whether it was slighted, and the
               Petitioners looked upon as inconsiderable,
               or beheld as a few frantick folk out of
               their wits, which consideration alone often
               melted their adversaries anger into pity
               unto them. The main design driven on in the
               Petition is to separate themselves from the
               Puritans (as persons odious to King James),
               that they might not fare the worse for their
               vicinity unto them; though these Familists
               could not be so desirous to leave them as
               the others were glad to be left by them. For
               if their opinions were so senselesse, and
               the lives of these Familists so sensuall as
               is reported, no _purity_ at all belonged
               unto them.” p. 32. From the Petition just
               mentioned, we find that “divers” of the
               Familists had been lately thrown into
               prison.

               The sect was attacked, at different times,
               by various writers: among others by John
               Rogers, in _The Displaying of an horrible
               Secte of grosse & wicked Heretiques, naming
               themselues the Family of Loue, with the
               liues of their Authours, & what doctrine
               they teach in corners. Newly set foorth by
               J. R. &c._ London, 1579. 12mo.

               In _The Lady of Pleasure_, act i. sc. 1,
               Shirley has the following passage:

               “Another game you have, which consumes more
               Your fame than purse: your revels in the
                  night,
               Your meetings call’d THE BALL, to which
                  repair,
               As to the court of pleasure, all your
                  gallants,
               And ladies, thither bound by a subpœna
               Of Venus, and small Cupid’s high
                  displeasure;
               ’Tis but the Family of Love translated
               Into more costly sin! There was a PLAY on’t,
               And had the poet not been brib’d to a modest
               Expression of your antic gambols in’t,
               Some darks had been discover’d, and the
                  deeds too:
               In time he may repent, and make some blush,
               To see the second part danc’d on the stage."
                             SHIRLEY’S _Works_, vol. iv. p.
                                9.

               I have quoted the lines only for the sake of
               correcting a mistake of the last editor of
               Beaumont and Fletcher. In a note on _The
               Widow_, Weber remarks, that Middleton “wrote
               a play entitled _The Family of Love_, but it
               seems that he was reprehended for not
               displaying these sectaries in their true
               colours. Thus Shirley in _The Lady of
               Pleasure_:

               "’Tis but the Family of Love translated
               Into more costly sin! There was a Play
                  on’t,” &c.
                      B. _and_ F.’s _Works_, vol. xiv. p.
                         145.

               What stupidity! not to perceive that the
               “Play on’t” was the drama called _The Ball_,
               written by Shirley and Chapman!




                             TO THE READER.

                                -------


               Too soon and too late this work is
               published: too soon, in that it was in the
               press before I had notice of it, by which
               means some faults may escape in the
               printing; too late, for that it was not
               published when the general voice of the
               people had sealed it for good, and the
               newness of it made it much more desired than
               at this time; for plays in this city are
               like wenches new fallen to the trade, only
               desired of your neatest gallants whiles
               they’re fresh; when they grow stale they
               must be vented by termers[175] and country
               chapmen. I know not how this labour will
               please: sure I am it passed the censure of
               the stage with a general applause. Now,
               whether _vox populi_ be _vox Dei_ or no,
               that I leave to be tried by the acute
               judgment of the famous six wits of the
               city.—FAREWELL.

                             PROLOGUE.[176]


               If, for opinion hath not blaz’d his fame,
               Nor expectation fill’d the general round,
               You deem his labours slight, you both
                  confound
               Your graver judgment and his merits:
               Impartial hearing fits judicious spirits.
               Nor let the fruit of many an hour fall
               By envy’s tooth or base detraction’s gall:
               Both which are tokens of such abject
                  spirits,
               Which, wanting worth themselves, hate
                  other[s’] merits;
               Or else of such, which once made great by
                  fame,
               Repine at those which seek t’ attain the
                  same.
               From both we know all truer judgments free:
               To them our Muse, with blushing modesty,
               Patiently to her entreats their favour;
               Which done, with judgment praise, or else
                  dislike the labour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.[177]


        GLISTER, _a doctor of physic_.
        PURGE, _a jealous apothecary_.
        DRYFAT, _a merchant, a brother of the Family_.
        GERARDINE, _a lover_ [_of_ MARIA].
        LIPSALVE, } _two gallants that only_
        GUDGEON, } _pursue city lechery_.
        CLUB, _an apprentice_ [_to_ PURGE].
        VIAL, _a servant to_ GLISTER.
        SHRIMP _and_ }
        PERIWINKLE, } _pages to the gallants_.
        [_Apprentice and Servants_].

        MISTRESS GLISTER.
        MISTRESS PURGE, _an elder in the Family_.
        MARIA, _niece to_ GLISTER.




                          THE FAMILY OF LOVE.

                             --------------


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


                   _A Gallery in_ GLISTER’S _House_.

            _Enter_ GLISTER, MISTRESS GLISTER, _and_ MARIA.

          GLI. Tricks and shows! Protestations with men are like
        tears with women, forgot ere the cheek be dry. Gerardine
        is a gentleman; his lands be in statutes: ’a[178] is not
        for thee, nor thou for him: ’a is a gallant, and young
        thoughts be most unconstant.
          MAR. Yet young vines yield most wine.
          MIS. G. But old vines the best. Believe not these
        great-breeched[179] gallants; they love for profit, not
        for affection: if ’a brings thee to a fool’s paradise,
        ’a will forsake thee.
          GLI. Which fortune God send my enemy! Love is a cold
        heat,[180] a bitter sweet, a pleasure full of pain, a
        huge loss, and no gain. Why shouldest thou love him
        only?
          MAR. Words cannot force what destiny hath seal’d.
        Who can resist the influence of his stars,
        Or give a reason why ’a loves or hates,
        Since our affections are not rul’d by will,
        But will by our affections?[181] ’Tis blasphemy
        ’Gainst love’s most sacred deity, to ask[182]
        Why we do love, since ’tis his only power
        That sways all our affections: all things which be,
        Beasts, birds, men, gods, pay him their fealty.
          GLI. Tut, love is an idle fantasy, bred by desire,
        nursed by delight, an humour that begins his dominion in
        Leo the lion, the sign of the heart; and ends in Aries
        the ram, the sign of the head: his power is to stir the
        blood,—pricks up the flesh, fills all the body with a
        libidinous humour, and is indeed the overture[183] of
        all ladies: which to prevent, I have banished Gerardine,
        your dearly beloved, my house; and as for you, since I
        am your guardian by my brother’s last will, I will
        sequester you from all other rooms in my house save this
        gallery and your upper chamber, till, in discretion, I
        shall find it convenient to enlarge you.
          MAR. My body you may circumscribe, confine,
        And keep in bounds; but my unlimited love
        Extends itself beyond all circumscription.
          MIS. G. Believe me, Maria, I have known the natures of
        divers of these gallants. If they possess the unlimited
        love of us women in never so ample manner, without the
        society of the body, I know how soon their love
        vadeth:[184] young men’s love is like ivy; it must have
        somewhat to cleave to, or it never prospers. Love is
        like fasting-days, but the body is like flesh-days; and
        ’tis our English gallants’ fashion to prefer a morsel of
        flesh before all the fasting-days in the whole year.

                             _Enter_ VIAL.

          GLI. The news with you, Vial?
          VIAL. And it like[185] your worship, here’s Club, master
        Purge the ’pothecary’s ’prentice, come to invite you, my
        mistress, and mistress Maria, to supper, and to see
        master Gerardine’s will sealed.
          GLI. Tell Club my wife and myself will be there, but
        Maria shall not come. [_Exit_ VIAL.]—There must be your
        sweetheart’s parting feast. Now ’a perceives no access
        to my house, ’a will to sea; a good riddance: if ’a
        returns not, you, forsooth, are his heir; that’s not
        much amiss. Yet there may be tricks: I will not be
        overreached. Come, to your chamber; where, till my
        return, you shall be in safe custody.
                                 [_Exit with_ MISTRESS GLISTER.
          MAR. O silly men, which seek to keep in awe
        Women’s affections, which can know no law!
                                         [MARIA _ascends_.[186]


                               SCENE II.


                 _A Street: before_ GLISTER’S _House_.

              _Enter_ GERARDINE, LIPSALVE, _and_ GUDGEON.

          LIP. Now, by the horns of Cupid’s bow, which hath been
        the bane to many a tall[187] citizen, I think there be
        no finer fools under heaven than we men when we are
        lovers. How thou goest crying up and down, with thy arms
        across, for a wife! which hadst thou, she’d cross both
        arms, head, and heart. Dost not yet know the old
        saying,—a wife brings but two good days, that is her
        wedding-day, and death-day?
          GUD. Believe him, Gerardine, ’a speaks now gospel: a man
        may take more wife with one hand than he’s able to put
        away with ten, Gerardine. A wife is such a cross, that
        all married men would most gladly be rid of.
          GER. And yet such a cross,[188] that all bachelors
             would gladly be creeping to.
        Profane not thus the sacred name of love,
        You libertines, who never knew the joys
        Nor precious thoughts of two consenting hearts!
          LIP. Didst ever see the true picture of a lover? I can
        give thee the hieroglyphic; and this it is: a man
        standing naked, a wench tickling him on the left side
        with a feather, and pricking him under the right side
        with a needle. The allegory, as I take, is this: that at
        the first we are so overjoyed with obtaining a wife,
        that we conceit no heaven like to the first night’s
        lodging; and that’s the signification of the left side,
        for wives always in the night take the left-side place:
        but, sir, now come to the needle on the right side,—
        that’s the daytime, wherein she commands; then, sir, she
        has a certain thing called tongue, ten times more sharp
        than a needle, and that, at the least displeasure, a man
        must have shot quite through him.
          GUD. Gramercies, Lipsalve, my neat courtier!—But, sirrah
        Gerardine, be thyself, sociable and free: leave not thy
        native soil for a giglot,[189] a wench who in her wit is
        proud——
          LIP. In her smile deceitful——
          GUD. In her hate revengeable——
          LIP. And in nothing but her death acceptable. I’ll tell
        thee, there’s no creature more desirous of an honest
        name, and worse keeps it, than a woman. Dost hear?
        follow this song; and if ever thou forsake thy country
        for a wagtail, let me be whipt to death with ladies’
        hairlaces.
          GER. Let’s hear that worthy song, gentle master
        Lipsalve.
          LIP. Observe:
            [_Sings_] _Now, if I list, will I love no more,
            Nor longer wait upon a gill,_[190]
            _Since every place now yields a wench;
            If one will not, another will:
            And, if what I have heard be true,
            Then young and old and all will do._
        How dost thou like this, man?
          GER. No more, no more.
        This is the chamber which confines my love,
        This is the abstract of the spacious world:
        Within it holds a gem so rich, so rare,
        That art or nature never yet could set
        A valued price[191] to her unvalued[192] worth.
          LIP. Unvalued worth?[193] ha, ha, ha! Why, she’s but
        A woman; and they are windy turning vanes;
        Love light as chaff, which when our nourishing grains
        Are winnow’d from them, unconstantly they fly
        At the least wind of passion: a woman’s eye
        Can turn itself with quick dexterity,
        And in each wanton glass can comprehend
        Their sundry fancy suited to each friend.[194]
        Tut, their loves are all compact of levity,
        Even like themselves: _nil muliere levius_ .
          GUD. Tut, man, every one knows their worth when they are
        at a rack-rent: in the term-time they bear as great a
        price as wheat when transportations are.
                            [MARIA _appears above at a window_.
          GER. Peace: let’s draw near the window, and listen if we
        may hear her.
          MAR. Debarr’d of liberty! O, that this flesh
        Could, like swift-moving thoughts, transfer itself
        From place to place, unseen and undissolv’d!
        Then should no iron ribs or churlish flint
        Divide my love and me: dear Gerardine,
        Despite of chance or guardian’s tyranny,
        I’d move within thy orb and thou in mine!
          LIP. She’d move within thy orb and thou in hers? blood,
        she talk[s] bawdy to herself.—Gudgeon, stand close.
          MAR. But, [ah], in vain do I proclaim my grief,
        When air and walls can yield me no relief!
          GUD. The walls are the more stony-hearted then.
          LIP. Peace, good Gudgeon, gape not so loud.
          MAR. Come thou, my best companion! thou art sensible,
        And canst my wrongs reiterate: thou and I
        Will make some mirth in spite of tyranny.
        The black-brow’d Night, drawn in her pitchy[195] wain,
        In starry-spangled pride rides now o’er heaven:
        Now is the time when stealing minutes tell
        The stole delight joy’d by all faithful lovers:
        Now loving souls contrive both place and means
        For wished pastimes: only I am pent
        Within the closure of this fatal wall,
        Depriv’d of all my joys.
          GER. My dear Maria, be comforted in this:
        The frame of heaven shall sooner cease to move,
        Bright Phœbus’ steeds leave their diurnal race,
        And all that is forsake their natural being,
        Ere I forget thy love.
          MAR. Who’s that protests so fast?
          GER. Thy ever-vowed servant, Gerardine.
          MAR. O, by your vows, it seems you’d fain get up.
          LIP. Ay, and ride too.                      [_Aside._
          GER. I would, most lov’d Maria.
          MAR. I knew it: he that, to get up to a fair woman, will
        stick to vow and swear, may be accounted no man. But
        tell me,
        Why hast thou chose this hour to visit me,
        Which nor the day nor night can claim, but both
        Or neither? why in this twilight cam’st thou?
          GER. T’ avoid suspicious eyes: I come, dear love,
        To take my last farewell; fitting this hour,
        Which nor bright day will claim nor pitchy night,
        An hour fit to part conjoined souls.
        Since that my native soil will not afford
        My wish’d and best content, I will forsake it,
        And prove more strange to it than it to me.
        In time’s swift course all things shall find event,
        Be it good or ill; and destinies do grant
        That most preposterous courses often gain
        What labour and direct proceedings miss.
          MAR. Wo’t[196] thou forsake me then?
          GER. Let first blest life forsake me! Be [thou]
             constant:
        My absence may procure thy more enlarge,
        And then——
          MAR. Desire’s conceit is quick; I apprehend thee:
        Be thou as loyal as I constant prove,
        And time shall knit our mutual knot of love.
        Wear this, my love’s true pledge. [_Throws it down._]
        I need not wish,
        I know thou wo’t return, n[or] will I say
        Thou may’st conceal thyself, being return’d,
        Till I may make escape, and visit thee.
        I prithee, love, attempt not to ascend
        My chamber-window by a ladder’d rope:
        Th’ entrance is too narrow, except this post,
        Which may with ease,—yet that is dangerous:
        I prithee, do it not. I hear some call:
        Farewell![197]
        My constant love let after-actions tell. [_Exit
           above._
          GER. O perfection of women!
          LIP. A plague[198] of such perfection!
          GER. How she wooes! by negatives shews——
          GUD. Thee what to do, under colour of dissuasion.[199]
          GER. She’s truly virtuous!
          LIP. Tut, man, outward apparance[200] is no authentic
        instance[201] of the inward desires: women have sharp
        falcon’s eyes, and can soar aloft; but keep them, like
        falcons, from flesh, and they soon stoop to a gaudy
        lure.
          GER. Why, then, Huguenot women are admirable angels.
          GUD. But angels[202] make them admirable devils.
          GER. My love’s chaste smile to all the world doth
             speak
        Her spotless innocence.

          LIP. Women’s smiles are more of custom than of courtesy:
        women are creatures; their hearts and they are full of
        holes, apt to receive, but not retain affection. Thou
        wilt to-morrow, thou sayest, begone: if thou wilt know
        the worst of a country,[203] marry before thou goest;
        for if thou canst endure a curst wife, never care what
        company thou comest in.
          GER. Come, merry gallants, will you associate me to my
        cousin Purge’s the ’pothecary’s, and take part of my
        parting feast[204] to-night?
          GUD. O, his wife is of the Family of Love: I’ll thither;
        perhaps I may prove of the fraternity in time: we’ll
        thither, that’s flat.                        [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                      _A Room in_ PURGE’S _House_.

                        _Enter_ MISTRESS PURGE.
          MIS. P. What, Club, Club! Is Club within there?

                             _Enter_ CLUB.
          CLUB. Mistress?
          MIS. P. I pray, what said master doctor Glister? will ’a
        come?
          CLUB. ’A sent word ’a would, for ’a was but to carry a
        diet to one of his patients—what call you her? she that
        paints a day-times, and looks fair and fresh on the
        outside, but in the night-time is filthier than the
        inside of Bocardo,[205] and is indeed far more unsavoury
        [to those] that know her, forsooth.

          MIS. P. Went ’a to her?
          CLUB. ’A had a receipt for the grincomes[206] in his
        hand, and ’a said ’a would take that in his way.
          MIS. P. ’Tis well: and what guest[s] besides him and his
        wife will be here at supper?
          CLUB. The first in my account is master Gerardine your
        cousin, master doctor Glister and his wife, master
        Dryfat the merchant, master Lipsalve the courtier,
        master Gudgeon the gallant, and their pages,—these, I
        take, will be your full number.
          MIS. P. Then belike my room shall be stuffed with
        courtiers and gallants to-night. Of all men I love not
        these gallants; they’ll prate much, but do little: they
        are people most uncertain; they use great words, but
        little sense; great beards, but little wit; great
        breeches,[207] but no money.
          CLUB. That was the last thing they swore away.
          MIS. P. Belike they cannot fetch it again with swearing,
        for if they could, there’s not a page of theirs but
        would be as rich as a monarch.
          CLUB. There’s nothing, mistress, that is sworn out of
        date that returns. Their first oath in times past was
        _by the mass_; and that they have sworn quite away: then
        came they to their faith, as, _by my faith, ’tis so_;
        that in a short time was sworn away too, for no man
        believes now more than ’a sees: then they swore _by
        their honesties_; and that, mistress, you know, is sworn
        quite away: after their honesty[208] was gone, then came
        they to their gentility, and swore _as they were
        gentlemen_; and their gentility they swore away so fast,
        that they had almost sworn away all the ancient gentry
        out of the land; which, indeed, are scarce missed, for
        that yeomen and farmers’ sons, with the help of a few
        Welchmen, have undertook to supply their places:
        then[209] at the last they came to silver, and their
        oath was _by the cross of this silver_; and swore so
        fast upon that, that now they have scarce left them a
        cross[210] for to swear by.
          MIS. P. And what do they swear by, now their money is
        gone?
          CLUB. Why, by (     ),[211] and _God refuse them_.
          MIS. P. And can they not as well say, men refuse them,
        as God refuse them?
          CLUB. No, mistress; for men, especially citizens
        and rich men, have refused their[212] bonds and
        protestations already.

                             _Enter_ PURGE.

          MIS. P. ’Tis well: see how supper goes forward, and
        that my shoes be very well blacked against I go to the
        Family. [_Exit_ CLUB.]—Now, sweet chick, where hast thou
        been? In troth, la, I am not well: I had thought to have
        spent the morning at the Family, but now I am resolved
        to take pills, and therefore, I pray thee, desire doctor
        Glister that ’a would minister to me in the morning.
          PUR. Thy will is known; and this for answer say,
        ’Tis fit that wise men should their wives obey.

        And now, sweet duck, know I have been for my cousin
        Gerardine’s will, and have it: ’a has given thee a
        legacy, but the total is Maria’s.

            _Enter_ GLISTER, MISTRESS GLISTER, _and_ DRYFAT.

        Master doctor, your wife, and master Dryfat, are most
        welcome: now, were my cousin Gerardine and master
        Lipsalve here, our number were complete.
          GLI. Is this frantic will done? will master Gerardine to
        sea? Let me tell you, I am no whit sorry; let such as
        will be headstrong bite on the bridle.
          PUR. ’Tis here, master doctor; all his worth is Maria’s,
        and locked in a trunk, which by to-morrow[’s] sun shall
        be delivered to your custody.
          DRY. Methinks ’twere a reasonable match to bestow your
        niece on master Gerardine: ’a is a most hopeful
        gentleman, and his revenue such, that having your
        niece’s portion to clear it of all incumbrances, ’twill
        maintain them both in a very worthy degree.
          GLI. Tut, you are master Dryfat the merchant; your skill
        is greater in cony-skins[213] and woolpacks than in
        gentlemen. His lands be in statutes: you merchants were
        wont to be merchant staplers; but now gentlemen have
        gotten up the trade, for there is not one gentleman
        amongst twenty but his land[s] be engaged in twenty
        statutes staple.[214]

              _Enter_ LIPSALVE, GERARDINE, _and_ GUDGEON.

          LIP. [_singing_] _Let every man his humour have,
            I do at none repine;
          I never regard whose wench I kiss,
            Nor who doth the like by mine:
          Th’ indifferent mind’s I hold still best,
            Whatever does befall;
          For she that will do with me and thee
            Will be a wench for all._
        And how go the squares?[215]
          PUR. Your stay, gentlemen, does wrong to a great many of
        good stomachs: your suppers expect you.
          GUD. And we our suppers.
          GLI. And from what good exercise come you three?
          GER. From a play, where we saw most excellent
        Sampson[216] excel the whole world in gate-carrying.
          DRY. Was it performed by the youths?[217]
          LIP. By youths? Why, I tell thee we saw Sampson, and I
        hope ’tis not for youths to play Sampson. Believe it, we
        saw Sampson bear the town-gates on his neck from the
        lower to the upper stage,[218] with that life and
        admirable accord, that it shall never be equalled,
        unless the whole new livery of porters set [to] their
        shoulders.
          MIS. P. Fie, fie, ’tis pity young gentlemen can bestow
        their time no better: this playing is not lawful, for I
        cannot find that either plays or players were allowed in
        the prime church of Ephesus by the elders.
          DRY. Aha, I think she tickled you there!
          PUR. Cousin Gerardine, shall the will be read before
        supper?
          GER. Before supper, I beseech you.
          LIP. Ay, ay, before supper,—for when these women’s
        bellies be full, their tongues[219] will be soon at
        rest.                                           [_Aside._
          DRY. Well, master doctor, pity the state of a poor
        gentleman: it is in you to stay his journey, and make
        him and yourself happy in his choice.
          GLI. Hold you content.—Shall this will be read?
          PUR. It shall.—Read you, good master Lipsalve.
          LIP. Command silence then.
          GUD. Silence!
          LIP. [_reads_] _In the name of God, amen. Know all men
        by these presents,[220] that I Gerardine, being strong
        of body, and perfect in sense_——
          DRY. That’s false; there’s no lover in his perfect
        sense.
          GUD. Peace, Dryfat.
          LIP. [_reads_] _Do give and grant to Maria Glister,
        daughter of John Glister, and niece to doctor Glister,
        physician, all my leases, lands, chattels, goods, and
        moveables whatsoever._ This is stark naught: you cannot
        give away your moveables, for mistress doctor and
        mistress Purge claim both shares in your moveables by
        reason of their legacies.
          DRY. That’s true, for their legacies must go out of your
        moveables.
          LIP. I[’ll] put it in—_all my moveables, these following
        legacies being paid_.
          GER. Do so, good master Lipsalve.
          LIP. [_after writing_] ’Tis done.
          MIS. P. I pray, read only the legacies, for supper
        stays.
          LIP. Well, the legacies: [_reads_] _First, I give to my
        cousin, mistress Purge, a fair large standing_—what’s
        this?—O, _cup,—a fair large standing cup, with a close
        stool_.
          DRY. ’Tis not so, ’tis not so.
          LIP. I cry you mercy; _a close cover_ ’tis. [_Reads_]
        _To mistress doctor I give a fair bodkin of gold, with
        two orient pearls attending the same: all which are in
        my trunk to be delivered to the keeping of Maria. In
        witness, &c._—Is this your will?
          GER. ’Tis.
          LIP. To it with your hand and seal.
                         [GERARDINE _signs and seals the will_.
          MIS. P. How is it, chick? I must have the standing cup,
        and mistress Glister the bodkin?
          PUR. Right, sweet duck.
          GER. I pray, gentlemen, put to your hands.
          DRY. Come, your fists, gentlemen, your fists.
          GER. [_while the witnesses sign the will._] Mistress
        Glister, I have found you always more flexible to
        understand the estate of a poor gentleman than your
        husband was willing: therefore I have thought it a point
        of charity to reveal the wrongs you sustain[221] by your
        husband’s looseness. Let me tell you in private that the
        doctor cuckolds Purge oftener than he visits one of his
        patients: what ’a spares from you ’a spends lavishly on
        her. These ’pothecaries are a kind of panders: look to
        it: if ’a keep Maria long close, it is for some
        lascivious end of his own.
          MIS. G. She is his niece.
          GER. Tut, these doctors have tricks. Your niceness is
        such that you can endure no polluted shoes[222] in your
        house: take heed lest ’a make you a bawd before your
        time; look to it.
          LIP. Come, our hands are testimonies to thy follies.
        Shall’s now to supper? We’ll have a health go round to
        thy voyage.
          GUD. Ay, and to all that forswear marriage, and can be
        content with other men’s wives.
          GER. Of which consort[223] you two are grounds;
        one touches the bass, and the other tickles the
        minikin.[224]
        But to our cheer: come, gentles, let’s away;
        The roast meat’s in consumption by our stay.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                      _A Room in_ PURGE’S _House_.

                             _Enter_ PURGE.
          PUR. The grey-eyed morning braves me to my face, and
        calls me sluggard: ’tis time for tradesmen to be in
        their shops; for he that tends well his shop, and hath
        an alluring wife with a graceful _what d’ye lack_?[225]
        shall be sure to have good doings, and good doings is
        that that crowns so many citizens with the horns of
        abundance. My wife, by ordinary course, should this
        morning have been at the Family, but now her soft pillow
        hath given her counsel to keep her bed: master doctor
        should indeed minister to her; to whose pills she is so
        much accustomed, that now her body looks for them as
        duly as the moon shakes off the old and borrows new
        horns. I smile to myself to hear our knights and
        gallants say how they gull us citizens, when, indeed, we
        gull them, or rather they gull themselves. Here they
        come in term-time, hire chambers, and perhaps kiss our
        wives: well, what lose I by that? God’s blessing on’s
        heart, I say still, that makes much of my wife! for they
        were very hard-favoured that none could find in’s heart
        to love but ourselves: drugs would be dog-cheap, but for
        my private well-practised doctor and such customers.
        Tut, jealousy is a hell; and they that will thrive must
        utter their wares as they can, and wink at small faults.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                            _Enter_ GLISTER.

          GLI. The tedious night is past, and the jocund morn
        looks more lively and fresh than an old gentlewoman’s
        glazed face in a new periwig. By this time my humorous
        lover is at Gravesend; and I go with more joy to fetch
        his trunk than ever the valiant Trojans did to draw in
        the Grecian jade: his goods shall into the walls of my
        Troy, and be offered to a face more lovely[226] than
        ever was that thrice-ravished Helen[’s]; yet with such
        caution that no danger shall happen to me.     [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                           _Another Street._

         _Enter_ LIPSALVE _and_ SHRIMP, _meeting_ GUDGEON _and_
                              PERIWINKLE.

          GUD. Master Lipsalve, welcome within ken: we two are so
        nearly linked, that if thou beest absent but one two
        hours, thy acquaintance grows almost mouldy in my
        memory.
          LIP. And thine[227] fly-blown in mine: how dost thou do?
          SHR. Fellow page, I think our acquaintance runs low
        too; but if it run not o’ the lees, let’s set it
        a-tilt, and give ’em some dregs to their mouldy,
        fly-blown compliments.
          PER. No, rather let’s pierce the rundlets of our running
        heads, and give ’em a neat cup of wagship to put down
        their courtship.
          SHR. Courtship? cartship! for the tongues of
        complimenters run on wheels: but mark ’em; they ha’ not
        done yet.
          GUD. And, i’faith, how is’t? methinks thou hast been a
        long vagrant.
          LIP. The rogation[228] hath been long indeed: therefore
        we may salute as ceremoniously as lawyers when they meet
        after a long vacation, who, to renew the discontinued
        state tale, they stretch it out with such length, that
        whilst they greet before, their clients kiss them
        behind.
          SHR. If his nose were put i’ the remainder of that state
        tale, he would say ’twere an unsavoury one.
          PER. I wonder why many men gird[229] so at the law.
          GUD. But what news now? how stands the state of things
        at Brussels?
          LIP. Faith, weak and limber, weak and limber: nothing
        but pride and double-dealing: virtue is vice’s lackey;
        beggars suck like horse-leeches at the heart of bounty,
        and leave him[230] so tired and spur-galled that he can
        be no longer ridden with honesty.
          SHR. I’ll tell thee, because they themselves have
        neither law nor conscience.
          GUD. Well fare the city yet! there virtue rides a
        cockhorse, cherished and kept warm in good sables and
        fox-fur, and with the breath of his nostrils drives
        pride and covetousness before him, like’s own shadow:
        beggars have whipping cheer: bounty obliges[231] men
        to’t; and liberality gives money for scrips and scrolls,
        sealed with strong arms and heraldry to outlive
        mortality: love there will see the last man born, never
        give over while there’s an arrow i’ th’ quiver.
          LIP. Now we talk of love, I do know, not far hence, so
        good a subject for that humour, that if she would wear
        but the standing collar and her things in fashion, our
        ladies in the court were but brown sugar-candy, as gross
        as grocery to her.
          GUD. She is not so sweet as a ’pothecary’s shop, is she?
          LIP. A plague on you! ha’ you so good a scent?—For my
        life, he’s my rival.                         [_Aside._
          GUD. Her name begins with mistress Purge, does it not?
          LIP. True, the only comet of the city.
          GUD. Ay, if she would let her ruffs stream out a little
        wider: but I am sure she is ominous to me; she makes
        civil wars and insurrections in the state of my stomach:
        I had thought to have bound myself from love, but her
        purging comfits make[232] me loose-bodied still.
          LIP. What, has she ministered to thee then?
          GUD. Faith, some lectuary[233] or so.
          LIP. Ay, I fear she takes too much of that lectuary to
        stoop to love; it keeps her body soluble from sin: she
        is not troubled with carnal crudities nor the binding of
        the flesh.
          GUD. Thou hast sounded her then, belike.
          LIP. Not I, I am too shallow to sound her; she’s out of
        my element: if I shew passion and discourse of love to
        her, she tells me I am wide from the right scope; she
        says she has another object, and aims at a better love
        than mine.
          GUD. O, that’s her husband.
          LIP. No, no; she speaks pure devotion: she’s
        impenetrable; no gold or oratory, no virtue in herbs nor
        no physic will make her love.
          GUD. More is the pity, I say, that fair women should
        prove saints before age had made them crooked.—’Tis my
        luck to be crossed still, but I must not give over the
        chase.                                        [_Aside._
          LIP. Come hither, boy, while I think on’t.
                             [LIPSALVE _talks apart to_ SHRIMP.
          GUD. Faith, friend Lipsalve, I perceive you would fain
        play with my love. A pure creature ’tis, for whom I
        have sought every angle[234] of my brain; but either
        she scorns courtiers, as most of them do, because they
        are given to boast of their doings, or else she’s
        exceeding strait-laced: therefore to prevent[235] this
        smell-smock, I’ll to my friend doctor Glister, a man
        exquisite in th’ art magic, who hath told me of many
        rare experiments available in this case. [_Aside._]—
        Farewell, friend Lipsalve.
          LIP. Adieu, honest Gregory: frequent my lodging; I have
        a viol de gambo and good tobacco. [_Exeunt_ GUDGEON
        _and_ PERIWINKLE.]—Thou wilt do this feat, boy?
          SHR. Else knock my head and my pate together.
          LIP. Away then: bid him bring his measure with him.
        [_Exit_ SHRIMP.]— Gerardine is travelled, and I must
        needs be cast into his mould. My flesh grows proud; and
        Maria’s a sweet wench, &c.[236] But yet I must not let
        fall my suit with mistress Purge, lest, _sede vacante_,
        my friend Gudgeon join issue:
        I’ll rather to my learned doctor for a spell,
        For I have a fire in my liver[237] burns like hell.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                     _A Room in_ GLISTER’S _House_.

                 _Enter_ MISTRESS GLISTER _and_ MARIA.

          MIS. G. I pray,[238] let’s have no polluted feet nor
        rheumatic chaps enter the house; I shall have my floor
        look more greasy shortly than one of your inn-of-court
        dining-tables.—And now to you, good niece, I bend my
        speech. Let me tell you plainly, you are a fool to be
        love-sick for any man longer than he is in your company:
        are you so ignorant in the rules of courtship, to think
        any one man to bear all the prick and praise?[239] I
        tell thee, be he never so proper, there is another to
        second him.
          MAR. Let rules of courtship be authentic still
        To such as do pursue variety;
        But unto those whose modest thoughts do tend
        To hoour’d nuptials and a regular life,
        As far from shew of niceness[240] as from that
        Of impure thoughts, all other objects seem
        Of no proportion,[241] balanc’d with esteem
        Of what their souls affect.
          MIS. G. No marvel[242] sure you should regard these men
        with such reverend opinion: there’s few good faces and
        fewer graces in any of them: if one among a multitude
        have a good pair of legs, he never leaves riding the
        ring till he has quite marred the proportion: nay, some,
        as I have heard, wanting lineaments to their liking and
        calf to support themselves, are fain to use art, and
        supply themselves with quilted calves, which oftentimes,
        in revelling, fall about their ankles; and for their
        behaviour, wit, and discourse, except some few that are
        travelled, it is as imperfectious and silly as your
        scholars new come from the university. By this light, I
        think we lose part of our happiness, when we make these
        weathercocks our equals.
          MAR. Disgrace not that for which our sect[243] was
             made,
        Society[244] in nuptials: ’bove those joys
        Which lovers taste when their conjoined lips
        Suck forth each other’s souls, the earth, the air,
        Yea, gods themselves, know none. Elysium’s sweet,
        Ay, all that bliss which poets’ pens describe,
        Are only known when soft and amorous folds
        Entwine the corps of two united lovers,
        Where what they wish they have, yet still desire,
        And sweets are known without satiety.[245]

                             _Enter_ VIAL.

          VIAL.[246] Here’s Club, forsooth, and his fellow
        ’prentice have brought master Gerardine’s trunk.
          MIS. G. Let them come in if their feet be clean. [_Exit_
        VIAL.]—So, then, your best-beloved is gone; fair
        weather after him! all thy passions[247], go with him!
        recomfort thyself, wench, in a better choice: his love
        to thee would have been of no longer continuance than
        the untrussing of his hose;[248] then why shouldst thou
        pine for such a one?
          MAR. She’s foolish sure: with what imperfect phrase
        And shallow wit she answers me!                [_Aside._

          _Enter_ CLUB _and another Apprentice, with a trunk_.

          MIS. G. Honest Club, welcome: is this master
        Gerardine’s trunk? he is gone then?
          CLUB. Ay, indeed, mistress Glister, he is departed this
        transitory city, but his whole substance is here
        enclosed; which, by command, we here deliver to your
        custody, to the use of mistress Maria, according to the
        tenour of the premises.
          MIS. G. Place it here, my honest Club: well done: and
        how does thy mistress? was she at the Family to-day?
        [CLUB _spits_.] Spit not, good Club, I cannot abide it.
          CLUB. Not to-day, forsooth; she hath overcharged herself
        and her memory: she means to use a moderation, and take
        no more than she can make use of.
          MIS. G. And, I prithee, Club, what kind of creatures are
        these Familists? thou art conversant with them.
          CLUB. What are they? with reverence be it spoken, they
        are the most accomplished creatures under heaven; in
        them is all perfection.
          MIS. G. As how, good Club?
          CLUB. Omitting their outward graces, I’ll shew you only
        one instance, which includes all other; they love their
        neighbours better than themselves.
          MIS. G. Not than themselves, Club.
          CLUB. Yes, better than themselves; for they love them
        better than their husbands, and husband and wife are all
        one; therefore, better than themselves.
          MIS. G. This is logic: but tell me, doth she not
        endeavour to bring my doctor of her side and fraternity?
          CLUB. Let him resolve[249] that himself, for here he
        comes.

                            _Enter_ GLISTER.

          GLI. O, hast thou brought the trunk, honest Club?
        I commend thy honest care: here’s for thy pains.
                                   [_Giving money._
          CLUB. I thank you, master doctor; you are free and
        liberal still: you’ll command me nothing back?
          GLI. Nothing but commendations: farewell. [_Exeunt_ CLUB
        _and Apprentice_.]—Your sweetheart Gerardine is by this
        time cold of his hope to enjoy thee: he’s gone; and a
        more equal and able husband shall my care ere long
        provide thee.—What clients have been here in my absence,
        wife?
          MIS. G. Faith, mouse,[250] none that I know more than an
        old woman that had lost her cat, and came to you for a
        spell in the recovery.
          GLI. I think egregious ignorance will go near to
        save this age; their blindness takes me for a
        conjuror: yesterday a justice of peace salutes me
        with proffer of a brace of angels[251] to help him
        to his footcloth,[252] some three days before
        stolen, and was fain to use his man’s cloak instead
        on’t.

                            _Re-enter_ VIAL.

          VIAL. Here’s a gentleman craves speech with you, sir.
          GLI. Go in, sweet wife, and give my niece good counsel.
                        [_Exeunt_ MISTRESS GLISTER _and_ MARIA.

        —His name?
          VIAL. He will not tell it me.
          GLI. His countenance?
          VIAL. I can see nothing but his eyes: the rest of him is
        so wrapt in cloak that it suffers no view.
          GLI. Admit him. [_Exit_ VIAL.]—What should he be for a
        man?[253]

                           _Enter_ LIPSALVE.

        What, master Lipsalve, is’t you? why thus obscured? what
        discontent overshadows you?
          LIP. A discontent indeed, master doctor, which to shake
        off I must have you extend your art to the utmost
        bounds. You physicians are as good as false doors behind
        hangings to ladies’ necessary uses: you know the very
        hour in which they have neither will to deny nor wit to
        mistrust: faith now, by the way, when are women most
        apt?
          GLI. Shall I unbutton myself unto you? after the receipt
        of a purgation, for then are their pores most open: but
        what creature of a courtier is it hath drawn your head
        into the woodcock’s noose?
          LIP. A courtier? nay, by this flesh, I am clean fallen
        out with them; they have nothing proportionable.
          GLI. O, I perceive, then, ’tis some city star that
        attracts your aspect.
          LIP. He knows by his art. [_Aside._]—In plain terms, a
        certain ’pothecary’s wife.
          GLI. Upon my life, mistress[254] Purge: I smell you,
        sir.
          LIP. You may smell a man after a purgation: indeed, sir,
        ’tis she. Now, for that fame hath bruited[255] you to be
        a man expert in necromancy, I would endear[256] myself
        to you for ever, would you vouchsafe to let one of your
        spirits bring mistress Purge into some convenient place,
        where I might enjoy her: I have heard of the like: can
        you perform this?
          GLI. With much facility, I assure you: but you must
        understand that the apparition of a spirit is dreadful,
        and withal covetous, and with no small sum of gold hired
        to such feats.

                            _Re-enter_ VIAL.

          VIAL. Sir, here’s another gentleman, muffled too, that
        desires present conference with you.
          GLI. Walk you into that room: I will bethink myself for
        your good, and instantly resolve[257] you. [_Exit_
        LIPSALVE.]—Let the gentleman come in. [_Exit_ VIAL.]—
        Lipsalve in love with my vessel of ease? come to me to
        help him to a morsel most affected by mine own palate?
        No more but so: I have shaped it; the conceit tickles
        me.

                            _Enter_ GUDGEON.

        Sir, as a stranger I welcome you—what, master Gudgeon,
        have I caught you? I thought it was a gallant that
        walked muffled: come, let me behold you at full; here
        are no sergeants, man.
          GUD. Master doctor, this my obscure coming requires an
        action more obscure; and, in brief, this ’tis. Sir, you
        are held a man far seen in nature’s secrets; I know you
        can effect many things almost impossible: know, then, I
        love mistress Purge, and opportunity favours me not, nor
        indeed is she so tractable as I expected: if either by
        medicine or your art magical you can work her to my
        will, I have a poor gallant’s reward, sir.
          GLI. That’s just nothing. [_Aside._]—But how, sir, would
        you have me to procure you access to mistress Purge? you
        never knew a physician a bawd.
          GUD. Why, by conjuration, I tell you, wherein you are
        said to be as well practised as in physic: here’s the
        best part of my present store to effect it.
                                               [_Giving money._

          GLI. Not a penny for myself; but my spirits, indeed,
        they must be feed.[258] Walk you by here, while I think
        upon a spell. [GUDGEON _retires_.]—What mystery should
        this be? Lipsalve and Gudgeon both in love with mistress
        Purge, and come to me to help ’em by art magic? ’Tis
        some gullery sure; yet, if my invention hold, I’ll fit
        them.—Who’s within there?

                         _Enter Servant._[259]

        Fetch me, in all haste, two good whips; I think you may
        have them not far hence. [_Exit Servant._]—It shall be
        so. [_Aside._]—Now, tell me, master Gudgeon, does no man
        know of your love to mistress Purge?
          GUD. Not a man, by my gentry.
          GLI. Then, sir, know I’ll effect it; but understand
        withal the apparition will be most horrid if it appear
        in his proper form, and will so amaze and dull your
        senses, that your appetite will be lost and weak, though
        mistress Purge should attend it naked. Now, sir, could
        you name a friend with whom you are most conversant, in
        his likeness should the spirit appear.
          GUD. Of all men living my conversation is most frequent
        with Lipsalve the courtier.
          GLI. ’Tis enough: I’ll to my spirit. [GUDGEON _retires,
        and_ GLISTER _writes a few words_.]—Are these whips come
        there?

                     _Re-enter Servant with whips._

          SER. Ready here, sir.                        [_Exit._
          GLI. So, lie thou[260] there. My noble gallants, I’ll so
        firk you! [_Aside._]—Sir, my spirit agrees in Lipsalve’s
        shape: to-morrow, ’twixt the hours of four and five,
        shall mistress Purge be rapt with a whirlwind into
        Lipsalve’s chamber: that’s the fittest place, for, by
        the break of day, Lipsalve shall be mounted and forsake
        the city for three days; so my spirit resolves[261] me.
        Now, sir, by my art, at that very hour shall his
        chamber-door fly open; into which boldly enter in this
        sort accoutred; put me on a pure clean shirt, leave off
        your doublet (for spirits endure nothing polluted), take
        me this whip in your hand, and, being entered, you shall
        see the spirit in Lipsalve’s shape, in the self-same
        form that you appear; speak these words here ready
        written [_giving a paper_], take three bold steps
        forward, then whip him soundly, who straight vanisheth,
        and leaves mistress Purge to your will.
          GUD. Ay, but shall your spirit come armed with a whip
        too?
          GLI. He shall, but have no power to strike.
          GUD. Is this infallible? have you seen the proof?
          GLI. _Probatum_, upon my word; I have seen the
        experience: if it fail, say I am a fool, and no
        magician.
          GUD. Master doctor, I would you had some suit at court;
        by the faith of a courtier, I would beg it for you. Fare
        you well, sir: I shall report of you as I find your
        charm.
          GLI. And no otherwise, sir: let me understand how you
        thrive. [_Exit_ GUDGEON.]—Ha, ha, ha! Now to my friend
        Lipsalve: I must possess him with the same circumstance;
        wherein I am assured to get perpetual laughter in their
        follies and my revenge.                        [_Exit._

                         _Re-enter_ MARIA.[262]

          MAR. O, which way shall I turn, or shift, or go,
        To lose one thought of care? no soothing hope
        Gives intermission, or beguiles one hour
        Of tedious time, which never will have end,
        Whilst love pursues in vain my absent friend.
        Thou continent of wealth, whose want of store,
        For that it could not peize[263] th’ unequal scale
        Of avarice, giv’st matter to my moan!
        O dross, the level of insatiate eyes,
        The devil’s engine, and the soul’s corrupter,
        Thou play’st th’ attorney ’gainst the lawful force
        Of true affection, dost interpose a bar
        ’Twixt hearts conjoin’d! curs’d be thy seed of strife,
        Whose progress chokes the natural course of life!

                      [GERARDINE _rises out of the trunk, while_
                           MARIA _retreats in alarm_.

          MAR. O, help, help, help!
          GER. Stay, sweet Maria! I bring thee ample joy
        To check that sudden fear: let thy sweet heart,
        That constant seat of thy affection,
        Repay that blood exhausted from thy veins.
        Fear not, sweet wench: I am no apparition,
        But the firm substance of thy truest friend:
        Know’st thou me now?
          MAR. Gerardine, my love?
        [O] what unheard-of accident presents
        Thy unexpected self, and gives my heart
        Matter of joy, mix’d with astonishment?
        I thought thou had’st been cabin’d in thy ship,
        Not trunk’d within my cruel guardian’s house.
          GER. That cruelty gives fuel to desire;
        For love suppress’d fares like a raging fire,
        Which burns all obstacles that stop his course,
        And mounts aloft. The ocean in his source
        May easier hide himself and be confin’d,
        Than love can be obscur’d; for in the mind
        She holds her seat, and through that heavenly essence
        Is near when far remote; her virtual presence
        Fills, like the air, all places, gives delight,
        Hope in despair, and heart ’gainst fell despite.
        That worst of men, thy cruel guardian, may
        Keep down awhile, but cannot dissipate
        What heaven hath join’d; for fate and providence
        Gave me this stratagem, to let him know
        That love will creep where ’tis restrain’d to go.
          MAR. I apprehend the rest: O rare conceit!
        I see thy travel happily was feign’d
        To win access, which with small ease thou’st[264]
           gain’d.
        This trunk, which he so greedily supposes
        Contains thy substance (as it doth indeed),
        Upon thy fair pretence in lieu of love
        Bequeath’d to me, if death should stop the course,—
        This trunk, I say, he hugs; sink thou or swim,
        So he may feed his wolf, that root of sin,
        His avarice: but heaven, that mocks man’s might,
        Gives this close means t’ insist upon our right.
          GER. Ingenious spirit, true oracle of love!
        Thou hast prevented[265] me: this was my plot,
        Whose end and scope I long to imitate
        With accents free, and uncontroll’d with fear.
        Does opportunity stand fair?
          MAR. Not now:
        Danger stands sentinel.
          GER. Then I’ll retire:
        We must be cautelous.[266]
                               [_He goes again into the trunk._
          MAR. So, so: and time
        Shall not oft turn his hour-glass ere I’ll find
        Place[267] and occasion fitting to thy mind.   [_Exit._


                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                          MARIA’S _Apartment_.

                     _Enter_ GERARDINE _and_ MARIA.

          GER. The coast is clear, and Argus’ wakeful eyes
        Securely sleep: time turns to us his front.
        Come, sweet Maria, of th’ auspicious hours
        Let’s take advantage.
          MAR. With all my heart;
        I do embrace the motion with thyself:
        Welcome, sweet friend, to liberty of air,
        Which now, methinks, doth promp[t] our breaths to move
        Sweet accents of delight, the joys of love.
        How dost thou brook thy little-ease,[268] thy trunk?
          GER. That trunk confines this chest; this chest
             contains
        Th’ unbounded speculation of our love,
        Incomprehensible grief, joy, hope, and fears;
        Th’ affections of my mind are like the spheres,
        Which in their jarring motions do agree,
        Through th’ influence of love’s sweet harmony.
          MAR. Are not inferior bodies here on earth
        Produc’d and govern’d by those heavenly ones?
          GER. They are.
          MAR. They jar, you say; yet in that strife maintain
        Perpetual league: why should their influence
        In rational souls be check’d by erring sense?
        Or why should mutual love, confirm’d by heaven,
        B’ infring’d by men? methinks ’tis most uneven.[269]
          GER. Thou argu’st well, Maria; and this withal,
        That brutes nor animals do prove a thrall
        To such servility: souls that are wards
        To gold, opinion, or th’ undue regards
        Of broking men, wolves that in sheep-skin bands
        Prey on the hearts to join th’ unwilling hands,
        Ruin fair stocks, when generous houses die,
        Or propagate their name with bastardy.
          MAR. Sterility and barrenness ensue
        Such forced love; nor shall erroneous men
        Pervert my settled thoughts, or turn mine eye
        From thy fair object, which I will pursue,
        Rich in thy love, proud of this interview.
          GER. I’ll suck these accents: let our breaths engender
        A generation of such pleasing sounds,
        To interchange delights. O, my blood’s on fire!
        Sweet, let me give more scope to true desire.
          MAR. What wouldst thou more than our minds’ firm
             contract?
          GER. Tut, words are wind; thought unreduct[270] to
             act[271]
        Is but an embryon in the truest sense.
          MAR. I am beleague[r]’d; I had need of sense:
        You make me blush: play fair yet above board.
          GER. Hear me exemplify love’s Latin word
        Together with thyself:
        As thus:—hearts join’d, _Amore_: take _A_ from thence,
        Then _more_ is the perfect moral sense,
        Plural in manners, which in thee do shine
        Saint-like, immortal, spotless, and divine:
        Take _M_ away, _ore_ in beauty’s name
        Craves an eternal trophy to thy fame:
        Lastly, take _O_, in _re_ stands all my rest,
        Which I, in Chaucer-style, do term a jest.
          MAR. You break all modest bounds; away, away!
          GER. So when men come behind do women say.
          MAR. Come, come, I say—
          GER. Ay, that’s the word indeed:
        Men that come bold before are like to speed.

        But who comes here?[272] _Monstrum horrendum!_ my
        nostrils have the rank scent of knavery. Maria, let’s
        remove ourselves to the window, and observe this piece
        of man’s flesh.                        [_Scene closes._


                               SCENE II.


                 _A Street: before_ GLISTER’S _House_.

        _Enter_ LIPSALVE _disguised as_ GERARDINE, _and_ SHRIMP.
          LIP. Now, mistress Maria, ward yourself: if my strong
        hope fail not, I shall be with you to bring——
          SHR. To bring what, sir? some more o’ your kind?
          LIP. Faith, boy, that’s mine aim.
          SHR. I’ll be sworn, sir, you have a good loose;[273] you
        let fly at ’em a-pace.
          LIP. I have shot fair and far off; but now I hope to hit
        the mark indeed.
          SHR. God save it!
          LIP. But where’s the sign?
          SHR. Why, there.
          LIP. That’s a special thing to be observed.
          SHR. I have heard talk of the Gemini: methinks, that
        should be a star favourable to your proceeding.
          LIP. The Gemini? O, I apprehend thee: that’s because I
        am so like Gerardine; ha, is’t not so, boy?
          SHR. As if you were spit out on’s mouth, sir; you must
        needs be like him, for you are both cut out of a piece.
        But, lord, sir, how you hunt this chase of love! are you
        not weary?
          LIP. Indefatigable, boy, indefatigable.
          SHR. Fatigable, quoth you? you may call it leanable well
        enough, for I am sure it is able to make a man lean.
          LIP. ’Tis my vocation, boy; we must never be weary
        of well-doing: love’s as proper to a courtier as
        preciseness to a puritan.

                   [MARIA _appears above_; GERARDINE _concealing
                         himself behind her_.[274]

          SHR. Love, _subaudi_ lust; a punk in this place
        _subintelligitur_.                            [_Aside._
          LIP. Boy, I have spied my saint.
          SHR. Then down on your knees.
          LIP. Fly off, lest she take thee for my familiar.—
        Save thee, sweet Maria!
        Nay, wonder not (for thou thyself art wonder,)
        To see this unexpected gratulation.
          MAR. Whom do I see? O, how my senses wander!
        Am not I Hero? art not thou Leander?
          GER. Thou’rt in the right, sweet wench; more of that
             vein.
          LIP. Her passion o’ercomes[275] her; ’tis the kindest
             soul!
        O excellent device! it works, it works, boy.
          SHR. It does indeed, sir, like the suds of an ale-fat
             or a washing-bowl.
          LIP. Joy not too much; extremes are perilous.
          MAR. O weather-beaten love!—Cisley, go make a fire;
        Go, fetch my ladder of ropes, Leander’s come.
          LIP. Mark, how prettily in her rapture she harps upon
             Gerardine’s travel.—
        Let th’ ecstasy have end, for I am Gerardine.
          GER. The devil you are!                     [_Aside._
          MAR. Ha? let me see: my love so soon return’d?
          LIP. I never travell’d farther than thine eyes;
        My bruited[276] journey was a happy project
        To cast a mist before thy jealous guardian,
        Who now, suspectless, gives some hope t’ attain
        My wish’d delight, before pursu’d in vain.
          GER. Ask if he strain’d not hard for that same
             project.
          MAR. Has not that project overrack’d thy brain,
        And spent more wit than thou hast left behind?
          SHR. By this light, she flouts him.        [_Aside._
          LIP. No, wit is infinite: I spent some brain;
        Thy love did stretch my wit upon the tenters.
          GER. Then is’t like to shrink in the wetting.
                                                      [_Aside._

          MAR. It cottens well;[277] it cannot choose but bear
        A pretty nap: I tender thy capacity;
        A comfortable caudle cherish it:
        But where’s my favour that I bid thee wear
        As pledge of love?
          GER. Now dost thou put him to’t;
        More tenters for his wit; he’s _non plus_ quite.
          LIP. I wear it, sweet Maria, but on high days,
        Preserve it from the tainting of the air—
        What should I say? [_Aside._]—’Tis in my t’other
           hose.[278]
          MAR. How? in your t’other hose? he that I love
        Shall wear my favour in those hose he has on.
          LIP. Fiends and furies! block that I am!    [_Aside._
          SHR. In your t’other hose?—She talked of a ladder of
        ropes: if she would let it down, for my life, he would
        hang himself in’t. [_Aside._]—In your t’other hose? why,
        those hose are in lavender:[279] besides, they have
        never a codpiece; but, indeed, there needs no ivy where
        the wine is good: in your t’other hose?
          MAR. I said you were too prodigal of wit.
          LIP. Expostulate no more; grant me access,
        Or else I’ll travel to the wilderness.
          MAR. Your only way: go, travel till you tire;
        Be rid, and let a gull discharge the hire.
          SHR. Master, the doctor, the doctor!
          LIP. Where? which way?
          SHR. This way, that way, some way I heard him coming.
          LIP. O boy, I am abused, gulled, disgraced! my credit’s
        cracked.
          SHR. You know that’s nothing new for a[280] courtier.
          LIP. O, I shall run beside myself!
          SHR. No, sir, that’s my office; I’ll run by your side.
          LIP. My brain is out of temper! what shall I do?
          SHR. Take her counsel, sir; get a cullis[281] to
        your capacity, a restorative to your reason, and a
        warming-pan to your wit: he comes, he comes!
          LIP. Follow close, boy; let him not see us.
                               [_Exeunt_ LIPSALVE _and_ SHRIMP.

                            _Enter_ GLISTER.

          GLI. What, more flutterers[282] about my carrion? more
        battery to my walls? shall I never be rid of these
        petronel-flashes?[283] As for my friend Gerardine, the
        wind of my rage has blown him to discover countries; and
        let the sea purge his love away and him together,—I care
        not. Young wenches now are all o’ the hoigh: we that are
        guardians must respect more besides titles, gold lace,
        person, or parts; we must have lordships and manors
        elsewhere as well as in the man: wealth commands all;
        and wealth I’ll have, or else my minion shall lead apes
        in hell. I must after this gallant too: I’ll know his
        rendezvous, and what company he keeps.         [_Exit._
          MAR. Now must we be abrupt:[284] retire, sweet friend,
        To thy small-ease:[285] what more remains to do,
        We’ll consummate at our next interview.
          GER. So shall I bear my prisonment with pleasure:
        Look thou but big, our[286] cruel foe will yield,
        And give to Hymen th’ honour of the field.
                                               [_Exeunt above._


                               SCENE III.


          _A Street: before the Meeting-house of the Family of
                                 Love._

          _Enter_ MISTRESS PURGE, CLUB _carrying a link before
                                 her_.

          MIS. P. Fie, fie, Club, go a’ t’other side the way,
        thou collowest[287] me and my ruff; thou wilt make me an
        unclean member i’ the congregation.
          CLUB. If you be unclean, mistress, you may pure
        yourself; you have my master’s ware at your commandment:
        but what am I then, that does all the drudgery in your
        house?
          MIS. P. Thou’rt born to’t: why, boy, I can shew thy
        indentures; thou givest no other milk: we know how to
        use all i’ their kind.
          CLUB. You’re my better in bark and rine,[288] but in
        pith and substance I may compare with you: you’re above
        me in flesh, mistress, and there’s your boast; but in my
        t’other part we are all one before God.

                            _Enter_ DRYFAT.

          MIS. P. All one with me? dost thou swear too? why then,
        up and ride!
          DRY. Whither away, mistress Purge?
          MIS. P. To the Family, master Dryfat, to our
        exercise.[289]
          DRY. What, by night?
          MIS. P. O Lord, ay, sir, with the candles out too: we
        fructify best i’ th’ dark: the glance of the eye is a
        great matter; it leads us to other objects besides the
        right.
          DRY. Indeed I think we perform those functions best when
        we are not thrall to the fetters of the body.
          MIS. P. The fetters of the body? what call you them?
          DRY. The organs of the body, as some term them.
          MIS. P. Organs? fie, fie, they have a most abominable
        squeaking sound in mine ears; they edify not a whit; I
        detest ’em: I hope my body has no organs.[290]
          DRY. To speak more familiarly, mistress Purge, they are
        the senses, the sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and
        feeling.
          MIS. P. Ay, marry—marry, said I? Lord, what a word’s
        that in my mouth!—you speak now, master Dryfat; but yet
        let me tell you where you err too: this feeling I will
        prove to be neither organ nor fetter; it is a thing—a
        sense did you call it?
          DRY. Ay, a sense.
          MIS. P. Why, then, a sense let it be,—I say it is that
        we cannot be without; for, as I take it, it is a part
        belonging to understanding: understanding, you know,
        lifteth up the mind from earth: if the mind be lift up,
        you know, the body goes with it: also it descends into
        the conscience, and there tickles us with our works and
        doings: so that we make singular use of feeling.
          DRY. And not of the rest?
          MIS. P. Not at that time; therefore we hold it not amiss
        to put out the candles, for the soul sees best i’ th’
        dark.
          DRY. You come to me now, mistress Purge.

                        _Enter_ PURGE _behind_.

          MIS. P. Nay, I will come to you else, master Dryfat:
        these senses, as you term them, are of much efficacy in
        carnal mixtures; that is, when we crowd and thrust a man
        and a woman together.
          PUR. What, so close at it? I thought this was one end of
        your exercise:[291] byrlady,[292] I think there is small
        profit in this. I’ll wink no more; for I am now tickled
        with a conceit that it is a scurvy thing to be a
        cuckold.                                        [_Aside._
          DRY. I commend this zeal in you, mistress Purge; I
        desire much to be of your society.
          MIS. P. Do you indeed? blessing on your heart! are you
        upright in your dealings?
          DRY. Yes, I do love to stand to any thing I do, though I
        lose by it: in truth, I deal but too truly for this
        world. You shall hear how far I am entered in the right
        way already. First, I live in charity, and give small
        alms to such as be not of the right sect; I take under
        twenty i’ th’ hundred, nor no forfeiture of bonds unless
        the law tell my conscience I may do’t; I set no pot on
        a’ Sundays, but feed on cold meat drest a’ Saturdays; I
        keep no holydays nor fasts, but eat most flesh o’
        Fridays of all days i’ the week; I do use to say
        inspired graces, able to starve a wicked man with
        length; I have Aminadabs and Abrahams to my godsons, and
        I chide them when they ask me blessing; and I do hate
        the red letter[293] more than I follow the written
        verity.
          PUR. Here’s clergy![294]                    [_Aside._
          MIS. P. These are the rudiments indeed, master Dryfat.
          DRY. Nay, I can tell you I am, or will be, of the right
        stamp.
          PUR. A pox o’ your stamp!                   [_Aside._
          MIS. P. Then learn the word for your admittance, and you
        will be much made on by the congregation.
          DRY. Ay, the word, good mistress Purge?
          MIS. P. A Brother in the Family.
          DRY. Enough, I have my lesson.
          PUR. So have I mine. A Brother in the Family! I must be
        a Familist to-day: I’ll follow this gear[295] while ’tis
        on foot, i’faith.                             [_Aside._
          MIS. P. Then shore up your eyes, and lead the way to the
        goodliest people that ever turned up the white o’ th’
        eye.—Give me my book, Club, put out thy link, and come
        behind us.
             [DRYFAT _knocks at the door of the Meeting-house_.
          [_Within_]. Who’s there?
          DRY. Two Brothers and a Sister in the Family.[296]

            [MISTRESS PURGE, DRYFAT, _and_ CLUB, _enter the
                House: then_ PURGE _knocks at the door_.

          [_Within_]. Who’s there?
          PUR. A Familiar Brother.
          [_Within_]. Here’s no room for you nor your
        familiarity.
          PUR. How? no room for me nor my familiarity? why,
        what’s the difference between a Familiar Brother and a
        Brother in the Family? O, I know! I made ellipsis of
        _in_ in this place, where it should have been
        expressed, so that the want of _in_ put me clean out;
        or, let me see,—may it not be some mystery drawn from
        arithmetic? for my life, these Familists love no
        substraction, take nothing away, but put in and add as
        much as you will; and after addition follows
        multiplication of a most Pharasit-hypocritical crew.
        Well, for my part I like not this Family, nor, indeed,
        some kind of private lecturing that women use. Look
        too’t, you that have such gadders to your wives!
        self-willed they are as children, and, i’faith,
        capable of not much more than they, peevish[297] by
        custom, naturally fools. I remember a pretty wooden
        sentence in a preamble to an exercise,[298] where the
        reader prayed that men of his coat might grow up like
        cedars to make good wainscot in the House of
        Sincerity: would not this wainscot phrase be writ in
        brass, to publish him that spake it for an animal?
        Why, such wooden pellets out of earthen trunks[299] do
        strike these females into admiration, hit[300] ’em
        home; sometimes, perhaps, in at one ear and out at
        t’other, and then they depart, in opinion wiser than
        their neighbours, fraught with matter able to take
        down and mortify their husbands. Well, I’ll home now,
        and bring the true word next time. I shall expect my
        wife anon, red-hot with zeal, and big with melting
        tears; and this night do I expect, as her manner is,
        she will weep me a whole chamber-pot full. _Loquor
        lapides?_ do I cast pills abroad? ’Tis no matter what
        I say; I talk like a ’pothecary, as I am: I have only
        purged myself of a little choler and passion, and am
        now armed with a patient resolution. But how? to put
        my horns in my pocket? no:

              What wise men bear, is not for me to scorn;
              ’Tis a[n] honourable thing to wear the horn.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                         LIPSALVE’S _Chamber_.

          _Enter_ LIPSALVE _without his doublet, a whip in his
                                 hand_.

          LIP. Fortune, devil’s turd i’ thy teeth! I’ll turn no
        more o’ thy wheel: art is above thy might. What though
        my project with mistress Maria failed? more ways to the
        wood than one; there’s variety in love. It is believed I
        am out of town; my door is open: the hour is at hand;
        all things squared by the doctor’s rule; and now I look
        for the spirit to bring me warm comfort to clothe my
        nakedness, and that is mistress Purge, the cordial of a
        Familist; and come quickly, good spirit, or else my
        teeth will chatter for thee.            [_Scene shuts._


                             SCENE V.[301]


                  _Before_ LIPSALVE’S _Chamber-door_.

          _Enter_ GUDGEON _without his doublet, a whip in his
                                 hand_.

        ᚨGUD. O the naked pastimes of love, the scourge of
        dulness, the purifier of uncleanness, and the hot-house
        of humanity! I have taken physic of master Purge any
        time this twelvemonths to purge my humour upon’s
        wife, and I have ever found her so fugitive, from
        exercise[302] to exercise, and from Family to Family,
        that I could never yet open the close-stool of my mind
        to her; so that I may well say with Ovid, _Hei
        mihi,[303] quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis!_ Now
        am I driven to prove the violent virtue of conjuration:
        if it hit, and that I yerk my Familist out of the
        spirit, I’ll hang up my scourge-stick for a trophy, and
        emparadize my thoughts: though the doctor go to the
        devil, ’tis no matter. Ha, let me see: Lipsalve’s door
        open, and himself out of town? Excellent doctor,
        soothsaying doctor, oraculous doctor!
                                         [_Enters the chamber._


                               SCENE VI.


                         LIPSALVE’S _Chamber_.

          LIPSALVE _discovered, as before_: GLISTER _watching
                                above_.

          GLI. I have taken up this standing to see my gallants
        play at barriers[304] with scourge-sticks, for the
        honour of my punk:

                            _Enter_ GUDGEON.

        and in good time I see my brave spirits shining in
        bright armour, nakedly burning in the hell-fire of
        lechery, and ready for the hot encounter: sound
        trumpets, the combatants are mounted!         [_Aside._
          GUD. The apparition! mistress Purge peers through him; I
        see her.
          LIP. The spirit appears! but he might have come sooner:
        I am numbed with cold, a shivering ague hath taken away
        my courage.
          GLI. They are afraid one of another: look, how they
        tremble! the flesh and the devil strengthen ’em! ha, ha,
        ha!                                           [_Aside._
          GUD. Has ’a no cloven feet? what a laxative fever shakes
        me!
          LIP. Will ’a not carry me with him to hell? well, I must
        venture.—_Clogmathos._
          GUD. My cue.—_Clogmathathos._
          LIP. My cue.—_Garrazin._
          GUD. _Garragas._
          LIP. _Garrazinos._
          GUD. _Ton tetuphon._
          LIP. _Tes tetuphes._
          BOTH. _With a whirly twinos._
                                      [_They lash one another._
          LIP. Hold,[305] hold, hold!
          GUD. Gogs nowns, gogs blood!
          LIP. A pox, a plague, the devil take you!
          GUD. Truce, truce, I smart, I smart.
          GLI. Ha, ha, ha! O, for one of the hoops of my
        Cornelius’ tub![306] I must needs be gone, I shall burst
        myself with laughing else.
        Magic hath no such rule: men cannot find
        Lust ever better handled in his kind.
                                      [_Aside, and exit above._
          GUD. What art thou? with the name of Jove I conjure
        thee!
          LIP. With any name, saving the whip; I’ll no more of
        that conjuration, a plague on’t!
          GUD. Speak, art not a spirit in the likeness of my
        friend Lipsalve, that should transform thyself to
        mistress Purge?
          LIP. How, a spirit? I hope spirits have no flesh and
        blood; and I am sure thou hast drawn blood out of my
        flesh with the spirit of thy whip.
          GUD. Then shall we prove to be honest gulls, and the
        doctor an arrant knave.
          LIP. A plague upon him for a Glister! he has given our
        loves a suppositor[307] with a _recumbentibus_. I’ll
        tell thee, sirrah,——
          GUD. Tell not me, let me prevent thee; the wind shall
        not take the breath of our gross abuse: we feel the
        gullery, therefore let us swear by our naked truths, and
        by the hilts of these our blades, our flesh-tamers, to
        be revenged upon that paraperopandentical doctor, that
        pocky doctor.
          LIP. Agreed: we’ll cuckold him, that he shall not
        be able to put his head in at’s doors; and make
        his precise, puritanical, and peculiar punk, his
        ’pothecary’s drug there, a known cockatrice[308]
        to the world.
          GUD. If report catch this knavery, we have lost our
        reputations for ever: wherefore let’s be secret.
        Ill tax we women of credulity,
        When men are gull’d with such gross foppery.
          LIP. Come, let us in, and cover both our shames.
        This conjuration to the world’s a novelty;
        Gallants turn’d spirits, and whipt for lechery.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE VII.


                          MARIA’S _Apartment_.

                             _Enter_ MARIA.

          MAR. Gerardine, come forth, Maria calls!
        Those ribs shall not enfold thy buxom limbs
        One minute longer: the cincture of mine arms
        Shall more securely keep thy soul from harms.
          GER. [_coming out of the trunk_] What heavenly breath,
             of Phitonessa’s power,[309]
        That rais’d the dead corpse of her friend[310] to life,
        Prevails no less on me! for even this urn,
        The figure of my sadder requiem,
        Gives up my bones, my love, my life, and all,
        To her that gives me freedom in my thrall.
          MAR. Be brief, sweet friend, salute and part in one;
        For niggard time now threats with imminent danger
        Our late joy’d scope. Thy earnest, then, of love,
        Ere Sol have compass’d half the signs, I fear
        Will shew a blushing fault; but ’twas thine aim,[311]
        T’ enforce consent in him that bars thy claim.
          GER. Love salves that fault: let time our guilt
             reveal,
        I’ll ne’er deny my deed, my hand, and seal.
        The elements shall lose their ancient force,
        Water and earth suppress the fire and air,
        Nature in all use a preposterous course,
        Each kind forget his likeness to repair,
        Before I’ll falsify my faith to thee.
          MAR. The humorous bodies’ elemental kind
        Shall sooner lose th’ innated heat of love,
        The soul in nature’s bounds shall be confin’d,
        Heaven’s course shall retrograde and leave to move,
        Ere I surcease[312] to cherish mutual fire,
        With thoughts refin’d in flames of true desire.
          GER. These words are odours on[313] the sacred shrine
        Of love’s best deity: the marriage-god
        Longs to perform those[314] ceremonious rites
        Which terminate our hopes: till mine grow full,
        I’ll use that intercourse amongst my friends
        That erst I did; then, in the height of joy,
        I’ll come to challenge interest in my boy.
        Till then, farewell.
          MAR. You’ll come upon your cue?
          GER. Doubt not of that.
          MAR. Then twenty times adieu.              [_Exeunt._


                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


          _A Street: before the Meeting-house of the Family of
                                 Love._

          _Enter_ LIPSALVE, GUDGEON, SHRIMP, _and_ PERIWINKLE.

          GUD. Come, boys, our clothes,[315] boys: and what is
        the most current news, Periwinkle?
          PER. Faith, sir, fortune hath favoured us with no news
        but what the pedlar brought from Norfolk.
          LIP. Is there nothing stirring at court, Shrimp?
          SHR. Faith, there is, sir, but nothing new.
          LIP. Good wag, faith! thou smellest somewhat of a
        courtier, though thy mother was a citizen’s wife.—Off
        with that filthy great band, nay, quick; on with your
        robe of sanctity, nay, suddenly, man.
          GUD. And why must we shift ourselves into this demure
        habit, if impossible to be of the Family and keep our
        own fashion?
          LIP. Tut, man, the name of a gallant is more hateful to
        them than the sight of a corner-cap. Hadst thou heard
        the protestations the wife of a bellows-mender made but
        yesternight against gallants, thou hadst for ever
        abjured crimson breeches. She swore that all gallants
        were persons inferior to bellows-menders, for the trade
        of bellows-making was very aerial and high; and what
        were men and women but bellows, for they take wind in at
        one place and do evaporate at another;—evaporate was her
        very phrase.
          GUD. Methinks, her phrase flew with somewhat too strong
        a vapour.
          LIP. Nay, she proves farther, that all men receive their
        being chiefly from bellows, without which the fire burns
        not; without fire the pot seethes not; the pot not
        seething, powdered beef is not to be eaten; of which,
        she then averred our nation was a great devourer, and
        without which they could neither fight for their country
        abroad, nor get children at home; for, said she,
        powdered beef is a great joiner of nerves together.
          GUD. What answer madest thou?
          LIP. Marry, that I thought a bawd was a greater joiner
        of nerves together than powdered beef: with that she
        protested that a bawd was an instrument of the devil,
        and as she had proved that bellows-makers were of God’s
        trade, so bawds were of the devil’s trade; for (and
        thereupon she blew her nose) the devil and bawds did
        both live by the sins of the people.
          GUD. No more: mistress Purge is at hand.
          LIP. Vanish, boys, away. [_Exeunt_ SHRIMP _and_
        PERIWINKLE.]— Make haste: before Jove, she’ll be with
        us ere we can be provided for her.      [_They retire._

          _Enter_ MISTRESS PURGE, CLUB _carrying a link before
                                 her_.

          MIS. P. Advance your link, Club. At what time wert thou
        bound, Club? at Guttide,[316] Hollantide,[317] or
        Candletide?
          CLUB. I was bound, indeed, about midsummer.
          MIS. P. And when hath thy ’prenticeship end? at
        Michaeltide next?
          CLUB. So I take it.
          MIS. P. They say, Club, you fall very heavy on such you
        love not: you never learnt that of me.
          CLUB. Indeed, mistress, I must confess my falling is
        rustic, gross, and butcher-like: marry, yours is a
        pretty, foolish, light, courtlike[318] falling: yet,
        believe me, my master smells somewhat too gross of the
        purgation; he wants tutoring.
          MIS. P. And why, I pray?
          CLUB. My master being set last night in his shop, comes
        master doctor Glister, as his manner is, squirting in
        suddenly; and after some conference, tells my master
        that, by his own knowledge, you were young with child:
        to which my master replied, Why, master doctor, will you
        put me to more charges yet?
          MIS. P. Thou art a fool: in that my husband spake as
        wisely as if the master of his company had spoke. He
        knows doctors have receipts for women, which make[319]
        them most apt to conceive; and he promising ’a had
        ministered the same lately to me, thereupon spake it.
        Lead on with your link.
          LIP. Art ready?
          GUD. Ready.
          LIP. Then speak pitifully, look scurvily, and dissemble
        cunningly, and we shall quickly prove two of the
        Fraternity. [_Advancing with_ GUDGEON.]—Benediction and
        sanctity, love and charity fall on mistress Purge,
        sister of the Family!
          MIS. P. And what, I pray, be you two?
          LIP.[320] Two newly converted from the rags of
        Christianity to become good members in the house of the
        Family.
          MIS. P. Who, I pray, converted you?
          GUD. Master[321] Dryfat, the merchant.
          MIS. P. And from what sins hath he converted you?
          LIP. From two very notorious crimes; the first was from
        eating fish on Fridays, and the second from speaking
        reverently of the clergy: but ’a resolved[322] us your
        talent in edifying young men went far beyond his.

                        _Enter_ PURGE _behind_.

          MIS. P. A talent I have therein, I must confess, nor am
        I very nice[323] at fit times to shew it: for your
        better instructions, therefore, you must never hereafter
        frequent taverns nor tap-houses, no masques nor
        mummeries, no pastimes nor playhouses.
          GUD. Must we have no recreation?
          MIS. P. Yes, on the days which profane lips call
        holydays, you may take your spaniel and spend some hours
        at the ducking-pond.
          LIP. What are we bound unto during the time we remain in
        the Family?
          MIS. P. During the light of the candle you are to be
        very attentive; which being extinguished, how to behave
        yourselves I will deliver in private.
                                              [_Whispers._[324]
          PUR. ’Tis now come to a whisper. What young Familists be
        these? i’faith, I’ll make one; I’ll trip you, wife: I
        scent your footing, wife.
        For Galen[325] writes, Paracelsus can tell,
        ’Pothecaries have brains and noses eke[326] to smell.
                                                      [_Aside._
          LIP. We shall with much diligence observe it.
          PUR. I fear I shall have small cause to thank that
        diligence: but do your worst;
        He that hath read five[327] herbals in one year
        Can find a trick which shall prevent this gear.[328]

        They are going: follow, Purge, close, close and softly,
        like a horsekeeper in a lady’s matted chamber at
        midnight.                                     [_Aside._

               [MISTRESS PURGE _knocks at the door of the
                            Meeting-house_.

          [_Within_]. Who knocks?
          MIS. P. Brethren, and a Sister in the Family.
          [_Within_]. Enter in peace.

         [MISTRESS PURGE, LIPSALVE, GUDGEON, _and_ CLUB _enter
                              the house_.

          PUR. Brethren, and a Sister! that’s the word. How
        beastly was I mistaken last day! I should have said, A
        Brother in the Family, and I said, A Familiar Brother;
        for which I and my family were thrust out of doors: but,
        as Titus Silus of Holborn Bridge most learnedly was wont
        to say, qd——[329]                            [_Knocks._
          _Within_]. Who’s there?
          PUR. A Brother in the Family.
          [_Within_]. Enter, and welcome.
                                     [PURGE _enters the house_.


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

            _Enter_ GERARDINE, _disguised as a Porter_.[330]

          GER. Thou sacred deity, Love!
        Thou power predominate, more to be admir’d
        Than able to be exprest, whose orb includes
        All terrene joys which are! all states which be
        Pay to thy sacred throne,[331] as tribute-fee,
        Their thoughts and lives. Like Jove’s, so must thy acts
        Endure no question: why, thy hidden facts
        The gods themselves obey: heaven-synod holds
        No gods but what thy awful power controls;
        The Delphian archer, proud with Python’s spoil,
        At Cupid’s hand was forc’d to take the foil;
        Not Mars his star-like[332] adamantine targe
        Could free his warlike breast at Cupid’s charge;
        And Jove, whose frown all mortal lives bereaves,
        His[333] marble throne and ivory sceptre leaves,
        And in the likeness of a bull was seen,
        As forc’d by him to bear the Tyrian queen
        Through Neptune’s watery kingdom: if these submit,
        My metamorphose is not held unfit.

        And see, in most wished occasion, Dryfat the merchant
        presents himself.

                            _Enter_ DRYFAT.

        Sir, in the best of hours met: my thoughts had marked
        you out for a man most apt to do them the fairest of
        offices.
          DRY. What! art thou a Welsh carrier or a northern
        landlord, thou’rt so saucy?
          GER. Is’t possible, sir, my disguise should so much fool
        your knowledge? How? a northern landlord? can you think
        I get my living by a bell and a clack-dish?[334]
          DRY. By a bell and a clack-dish? how’s that?
          GER. Why, by begging, sir. Know you me now?
          DRY. Master Gerardine, disguised and ashore! nay, then I
        smell a rat.
          GER. Master Dryfat, shall I repose some trust in you?
        will you lay by awhile your city’s precise humour? will
        you not deceive me?
          DRY. If I deceive your trust, the general plague seize
        me! that is, may I die a cuckold.
          GER. And I say thou shalt die a true citizen, if thou
        conceal it: and thus in brief. It stands with thy
        knowledge how seriously I have and do still affect
        Maria: now, sir, I have so wrought it, that if thou
        couldst procure me a fellow that could serve instead of
        a crier, I myself would play Placket the paritor,[335]
        and summon doctor Glister and Maria to appear at thy
        house: and as I play[336] the paritor, so wouldst thou
        but assume the shape of a proctor, I should have the
        wench, thou the credit, and the whole city occasion of
        discourse this nine days.
          DRY. How’s this, how’s this? I should procure a fellow
        to play the crier,[337] and I myself should play the
        proctor? but upon what occasion should they be summoned?
          GER. Upon an accusation that doctor Glister should get
        Maria, his niece, with child, and have bastards in the
        country, which I have a trick to make probable.
          DRY. And now I recall it to memory, I heard somewhat to
        that effect last night in master Beardbush the barber’s
        shop: but how will this sort? who shall accuse him?
          GER. Refer that to me, I say, be that my care: all shall
        end in merriment, and no disgrace touch either of their
        reputations.
          DRY. Then take both word and hand, ’tis done: Club,
        mistress Purge’s ’prentice, shall be the crier.[338]
          GER. O my most precious Dryfat! may none of thy
        daughters prove vessels with foul bungholes, or none of
        thy sons hogsheads, but all true and honourable Dryfats
        like thyself!
          DRY. Well, master Gerardine, I hope to see you a
        Familist before I die.
          GER. That’s most likely, for I hold most of their
        principles already: I never rail nor calumniate any man
        but in love and charity; I never cozen any man for any
        ill will I bear him, but in love and charity to myself;
        I never make my neighbour a cuckold for any hate or
        malice I bear him, but in love and charity to his wife.
          DRY. And may those principles fructify in your weak
        members! I’ll be gone, and with most quick dexterity
        provide you a crier: to-morrow at my house, said you,
        they should appear?
          GER. Be that the time, most honoured Dryfat: but be this
        known to none, most loved sir, save Club, or to some
        other whom your judgment shall select as a fit person
        for our project.
          DRY. Thus enough: time out of sight.[339]    [_Exit._
          GER. Maria, thou art mine: earth’s perfection[340] and
        nature’s glory, woman! of what an excellency if her
        thoughts and acts were squared and levelled with the
        first celsitude[341] of her creation!
        T’ enjoy a creature,—whose dishevell’d locks,
        Like gems against the repercussive sun,
        Give[342] light and splendour; whose star-like eyes
        Attract more gazer loves[343] to see them move
        Than the Titanian[344] god, when Ægeon’s hill
        ’A mounts in triumph; a skin more pure and soft
        Than is the silk-worm’s bed; teeth[345] more white
        Than new-fall’n snow or shining ivory,—
        Is happiness sought by the gods themselves.
        Celestial Venus, born without a mother,
        Be thou propitious! thee and I implore,
        Not vulgar Venus, heaven’s scorn and Mars his whore.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                     _A Room in_ GLISTER’S _House_.

                 _Enter_ MISTRESS GLISTER _and_ MARIA.

          MAR. Good aunt, quiet yourself: ground not upon dreams;
        you know they are ever contrary.
          MIS. G. Minion, minion, coin no excuses: I grant dreams
        are deceitful, but a true judgment grounded upon
        knowledge never fails. What? have not I observed the
        rising and falling of the blood, the coming and going of
        the countenance, your qualms, your unlacings, your
        longings? most evident tokens; besides, a more certain
        sign than all these, too; you know’t, I need not speak
        it: nay, I am as skilful in that point as my husband; I
        can tell you, Aristotle speaks English enough to tell me
        these secrets. Body of me, so narrowly looked to, and
        yet fly out! Well, I see maids will ha’t in spite of
        laws or locks that restrain ’em; they will open, do men
        what they can.
          MAR. I see my fault appears: simplicity
        Hath no evasion; ’tis bootless to deny
        Where guilty blood, cited by touch of shame,
        Runs through my veins, and leaves my conscience’ stain
        Even in my face. Forbear, I do beseech you,
        To publish my defame: what I have done
        You shall not answer; I must bear mine own.
          MIS. G. Bear your own? ay, marry, there it goes! What
        must you bear?
          MAR. My sins, forsooth.
          MIS. G. Your sins, forsooth? Confess to me, and go not
        about the bush: you have been doing, that’s flat; you
        have caught a clap, that’s round; and answer me roundly
        to the point, or else I’ll square.[346] Come, whose act
        is’t? I cannot devise unless it be my husband’s, for
        none else had access to thee: I am sure time has turned
        his bald side to thee, and I do but wonder how thou
        tookst opportunity: speak, tell me.
          MAR. Now, good aunt, press me not; let time reveal
        What you suspect; for never shall my tongue
        Confess an act that tends unto my wrong.

              _Enter_ GERARDINE, _disguised as a porter_.

          MIS. G. Will you not bolt? I must ha’t out on you, and
        will.
          GER. By your leave, mistress——
          MIS. G. Passion of my heart, what art thou?
          GER. No ghost, forsooth, though I appear in white.
          MIS. G. No, but a saucy knave, I perceive by your
        manners.
          GER. None of that livery neither: I am of the bearing
        trade, forsooth; you may see by my smock,—frock, I would
        say: I am, if it please you, of the spick and span
        new-set-up company of porters. Here’s my breastplate;
        and besides our own arms, we have the arms of the city
        to help us in our burdens—_ecce signum!_ here’s the
        cross and the sword of justice in good pewter, I can
        tell you, which goes as current with us as better metal.
          MIS. G. What’s your name, sir?
          GER. Nicholas Nebulo: there’s but a straw’s-breadth
        between that and the arms; ’tis in the backside of the
        cross here, and well known in the city for an ancient
        name and an honest, an’t like your worship.
          MIS. G.[347] You are none of the twelve, are you?
          GER. No, forsooth, but one of the twenty-four——
          MIS. G. Orders of knaves:[348] I thought so. Sirrah,
        you’re a rascal, to come thus bluntly into my house with
        your dirty startups:[349] get you without doors, like a
        filthy fellow as you are; a place more fit for you.
          GER. O, good words, mistress! I may be warden of my
        company for aught you know; and for my bluntness, we
        have a clause in our charter to warrant that; for as we
        bear, so likewise we may be borne with, and have free
        egress and regress where our business lies.
          MIS. G. And what’s your business here?
          GER. I have a letter, an’t please you, to master doctor.
          MIS. G. From whence?            [_Taking the letter._
          GER. That I cannot shew your worship; but I had it of
        Curtal the carrier, whose lawful deputy I am.
          MIS. G. Leave your scraping, sirrah. Fie, how rank the
        knave smells of grease and taps-droppings! [GERARDINE
        _coughs and spits_.] What, are you rheumatic too, with a
        vengeance!
          GER. Yes, indeed, mistress; though I be but a poor man,
        I have a spice of the gentleman in me: master doctor
        could smell it quickly, because he’s a gentleman
        himself: I must to the diet, and that is tobacco at the
        ale-house; I use n’other physic for it.
          MIS. G. Did ever such a peasant defile my floor, or
        breathe so near me!—I’faith, sirrah, you would be bummed
        for your roguery, if you were well served.
          GER. I am bummed well enough already, mistress; look
        here else: sir-reverence[350] in your worship, master
        doctor’s lips are not made of better stuff.
          MIS. G. What an impudent rogue is this!—Sirrah, begone,
        I say; I would be rid o’ you.
          GER. Be rid o’ me? I shall gallop then: you mistake me,
        forsooth; I am a foot post, I do not use to ride.
          MIS. G. I think the rascal be humorous or drunk. Well, I
        will read the letter, and send him packing, or else he
        will spew or do worse before me: fie on him, I think he
        will infect me with some filthy disease.
                                           [_Reads the letter._
          GER. Or else I lose mine aim.               [_Aside._
          MIS. G. What’s here? [_Reads_] _Your poor nurse,
        Thomasine Tweedles!_[351] for my life now shall I find
        out my husband’s knavery I have so long suspected.
          GER. She begins to nibble; ’twill take, i’faith.
                                                      [_Aside._
        Mistress,
        I see some discontentment in your looks:
        Care ill befits so delicate a spirit;
        Be frolic, wench, for he that is so near thee
        Has been much nearer.
          MAR. That accent sounds sweet music; ’tis my love!
        That tongue breathes life into my lifeless spirits:
        Gerardine? O rapture! why thus disguis’d?
          GER. No more, be mute; thus must I vary forms
        To bring our cares to end: her jealousy
        Ensues this drift, which, if it take true scope,
        Love’s joy comes next: be fearless in that hope.
          MIS. G. ’Tis so: rats-bane! I ha’t: it racks on, it
        torments me! here ’tis: [_reads_] _Woe worth the time
        that ever I gave suck to a child that came in at the
        window, God knows how!_—Villanous lecher!—_yet, if you
        did but see how like the pert[352] little red-headed
        knave is to his father_—damnable doctor! a bastard in
        the country, and another towards[353] here! I am out of
        doubt this is his work.—You are an arrant strumpet!—
        Incest, fornication, abomination in my own house!
        intolerable! O for long nails to scratch out his eyes!
          GER. Or the breeches, to fight with him.
          MIS. G. Out of my sight, quean! thou shalt to
        Bridewell.—O, I shall be mad with rage!
          GER. Then you shall go to Bedlam.
          MIS. G. Hence, you slave!
          GER. I must have a penny; you must pay me for my pains.
          MIS. G. The devil pay thee!
          GER. O, that’s the doctor; but he wants his
        horns.
          MIS. G. But I’ll furnish him ere long, if I live.
          GER. It works as I would wish. [_Aside._]—Farewell,
             Maria;
        This storm once past, fair weather ever after!
        [_Exit._
          MIS. G. Was ever woman so moved!—but you shall be talked
        withal: and for mine old fornicator, he shall ha’t as
        hot as coals, i’faith: here’s stuff indeed! Come, minx,
        come: there’s law for you both: have I found your
        knavery? If I wink at this, let me be stone blind, or
        stoned to death: bear this, and bear all!    [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE IV.


                              _A Street._

          _Enter_ LIPSALVE, GUDGEON, SHRIMP, _and_ PERIWINKLE.

          LIP. Our hopes are cross’d: sure there’s some
           providence
        Which countermands libidinous appetites,
        For what we most intend is counter-check’d
        By strange and unexpected accidents;
        For by disguise procuring full access,
        Nay, ready to have seiz’d[354] th’ expected prize,
        The candle out, steps ’twix my hopes and me
        Some peasant groom,[355] possess’d and full enjoy’d
        That sweet for which our vigilant eyes have watch’d,
        And in one moment frustrates all our hopes.
          GUD. Upon my life, we are bewitched. The greasy rascal
        that first seized mistress Purge, by the last reflection
        of the light, appeared to my sight not much unlike her
        husband.
          LIP. The court’s gall, the city’s plague, and Europa’s
        sea-form[356] be his perpetual crest, what-e’er ’a was!
        To lose mistress Purge for lack of dexterity, is a
        disgrace insalveable: the like opportunity will never
        present itself.
          GUD. ’Twas an egregious grief, I must confess, to see a
        knave slip betwixt us both and take occasion by the
        foretop: but since these projects have had so star-cross
        events, let’s lay some plot how to revenge our late
        disgrace on the doctor by making him cuckold.

                             _Enter_ PURGE.

          LIP. Agreed: but what melancholy sir, with
        acrostic[357] arms, now comes from the Family?
          GUD. Purge the ’pothecary: I prithee, let’s step aside
        and hear the issue of this discontent.
                             [_They retire with the two pages._
          PUR. O the misery of married men’s estate!
          LIP. ’A begins very pitifully.              [_Aside._
          PUR. O women, what are many of you!
          LIP. Why, disease[s] to bachelors, and plagues to
        married men.                                  [_Aside._
          PUR. O marriage, the rage of all our miseries! my wife
        is a dissembling strumpet.
          GUD. So is many a man’s besides yours; and what of that?
                                                      [_Aside._
          PUR. I would have a law, that all such which pray little
        should instantly be married; for then would they pray
        continually, if it were but to be rid of their wives.
          LIP. This is a charitable request, and surely would pass
        the Lower-house.                              [_Aside._
          PUR. Surely if affliction can bring a man to heaven, I
        cannot see how any married man can be damned: I have
        made myself a plain cuckold.
          GUD. A pile[358] on ye, won’t you! had you not been so
        manable,[359] here are some would have saved you that
        labour.                           [_Aside._
          PUR. What shall I do in this extremity? had I but
        witness of the fact, I would make her answer it before
        authority. This is my wedding-ring; ’tis it, I know it
        by the posy: this I took from her finger in the dark,
        and she was therewith very well pleased: were not this,
        trow,[360] a sufficient testimony? she knows not that it
        was myself got so near her: I will take counsel. Well,
        little know bachelors the miseries they undergo when
        they prostrate themselves to women.
          LIP. [_coming forward with_ GUDGEON] O most true, master
        Purge! little knows a man what elements ’a is to pass,
        when ’a puts his head under a woman’s girdle. Your
        passion,[361] master Purge, is overheard, and, plain
        tale to tell, we were eye-witnesses of your wife’s
        treachery, and if need be, will be ready to depose as
        much.
          PUR. What, master Lipsalve and master Gudgeon, are you
        disguised testimonies?
        Nay, then, revenge, look big! Elf and fairy,
        Help to revenge the wronged ’pothecary!
          GUD. Why, now ’a speaks like himself: get me a
        paritor[362] for her straight.
          LIP. Conceal the ring, my little Purge; let not thy wife
        know thou hast it, until she comes to her trial.

            _Enter_ DRYFAT, _and_ GERARDINE _disguised as an
                              apparitor_.

          PUR. Your advices are very pithy; therefore in private
        let me disclose my intent.
          GUD. Off,[363] boys!
                      [PURGE, LIPSALVE, _and_ GUDGEON _retire_.
          SHR. What dost thou think of thy master? is ’a not a
        rare gull?
          PER. I think ’a will swallow and pocket more disgraces
        than large-conscienced lawyer fees in a Michaelmas term.
        Thy master, my honest Shrimp,[364] comes not much short
        of a fool too, but that ’a is a courtier.
          SHR. Draw somewhat near, and overhear their conference.
                                    [_Retires with_ PERIWINKLE.
          GER. This shape of the crier must Club to-morrow assume.
        Are you fitted for Poppin the proctor?
          DRY. Excellent, and have spent some study in the
        mystical cases of venery: I can describe how often a man
        may lie with another man’s wife before ’a come to the
        white sheet.
          GER. How long is that?
          DRY. Why, till ’a be taken tardy:—how long all womenkind
        may, by the statute, profess and swear they are maids.
          GER. And how long is that?
          DRY. Why, till their bellies be so big that it cannot be
        no longer concealed: but come forward towards Glister’s.
          LIP. It must be so; let the sumner[365] tickle her: you
        shall bring in these allegations, and let us alone to
        swear them.—[_Advancing with_ PURGE _and_ GUDGEON.]
        Who’s this? master Dryfat? opportunely met, sir: and
        whither so fast? the news, the news?
          DRY. Faith, gentlemen, I think to relate for news what I
        hear of doctor Glister would come stale to your
        hearings.
          LIP. O, the getting of his niece with child: tut, that’s
        apparently known to all the company.—But, in the name of
        Jupiter, what art thou, or from whence camest thou?
          GER. Why, sir, I come from compassing the corners of the
        land.
          GUD. Of what trade, in the name of Pluto?
          GER. Of the devil’s trade; for I live, as he does, by
        the sins of the people; in brief, sir, I am Placket the
        paritor.[366]
          LIP. As the devil would!—We have, my noble paritor,
        instant employment for thee; a grey groat is to be
        purchased without sneaking, my little sumner: where’s
        thy _quorum nomina_, my honest Placket?
          GER. Sir, according to the old ballad,
              _My_ quorum nomina _ready have I,
              With my pen and inkhorn hanging by_.
        Her name, sir, her name?
          GUD. Is’t no more but so?
          PUR. I have most right to her name.—Her name, master
        Placket, is my wife, mistress Purge, sir: to what place
        dost thou belong?
          GER. To the commissioners which sit to-morrow at master
        Dryfat’s upon the crimes of doctor Glister and others.
          LIP. Sits there a commission, Dryfat? now, for the love
        of lechery, let’s have mistress Purge summoned thither.
          GER. She makes my _quorum nomina_ reasonable full: my
        grant, sir, and she shall appear there upon a crime of
        concupiscence: is not that your meaning?
          PUR. Yes, my honest paritor: here’s thy fee.
                                               [_Giving money._

                   _Enter_ MISTRESS PURGE _and_ CLUB.

          GUD. And see how happily it succeeds! mistress Purge is
        new come from the Family. Let us step aside, while
        Placket the paritor gives her a summons.
          LIP. Content.—To her, Placket; but see, for the bribery
        of twelvepence, you strike her not out of your _quorum
        nomina_.
          GER. Fear not, sir.
                               [LIPSALVE, GUDGEON, PURGE, _and_
                                      DRYFAT _retire_.
          MIS. P. Forward apace, Club.
          GER. Your name I take to be mistress Purge, fair
        gentlewoman?
          MIS. P. I am mistress Purge, Purge’s wife the
        ’pothecary: what of that?
          DRY. Now you shall see him tickle her with a _quorum
        nomina_.                                      [_Aside._
          GER. I cite you, by virtue of my _quorum nomina_, to
        make your personal appearance by eight of the clock in
        the morrow morning, before certain commissioners at
        master Dryfat’s house, to answer to an accusation of a
        crime of concupiscence.
          MIS. P. To answer a crime of concupiscence? what’s that,
        I pray?
          GER. Why, ’tis to answer a venereal crime, for having
        carnal copulation with others besides your husband.
          MIS. P. What are you, I pray?
          GER. By name Placket, by trade a paritor.
          MIS. P. And must I answer, say you, to a venereal crime?
        I tell thee, Placket the paritor, I am able to answer
        thee or any man else in any venereal crime they’ll put
        me to; and so tell your commissioners.
          GER. If you fail your appearance, the penalty must fall
        heavy.
          MIS. P. If it fall never so heavy, I am able to bear
        it:—and so set forward, Club.        [_Exit with_ CLUB.
          LIP. [_coming forward with the others_] Excellent,
        i’faith!—After your wife, Purge.—Read, Placket, thy
        _quorum nomina_, my noble groat-monger.
                                                 [_Exit_ PURGE.
          GER. Silence! The first that marcheth in this fair rank
        is Thrum[367] the feltmaker, for getting his maid with
        child, and sending his ’prentice to Bridewell for the
        fact; Whip the beadle, for letting a punk escape for a
        night’s lodging and bribe of ten groats; Bat the
        bellman, for lying with a wench in a tailor’s stall at
        midnight, when ’a should be performing his office; and
        Tipple[368] the tapster, for deflowering a virgin in his
        cellar; doctor Glister, his wife, Maria, mistress Purge:
        these be the complete number.
          LIP. Now dissolve, and each to his occasion till
        to-morrow morning.                 [_Exeunt severally._


                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                     _A Room in_ GLISTER’S _House_.

                _Enter_ GLISTER _and_ MISTRESS GLISTER.

          MIS. G. This was your colour[369] to keep her close;
        but what cloak ha’ you for her’s and your own shame?
        What, your own niece, your brother’s daughter, besides
        your bastard in the country!

          GLI. Wife, range not too far, I would advise you; come
        home in time: vex me not beyond sufferance; the
        two-edged sword of thy tongue hath drawn blood o’ me.
        Patience, I say: thou art all this while in an error.
          MIS. G. No, thou hast been all this while in an urinal;
        thou hast gone out of thy compass in women’s waters:
        you’re a conjuror, forsooth, and can rouse your spirits
        into circles. Ah, you old fornicator, that ever I saw
        that red beard of thine! now could I rail against thy
        complexion: I think, in my conscience, the traces and
        caparison of Venus’ coach are made o’ red hairs; which
        may be a true emblem that no flaxen stuff or tanned
        white leather draws love like ’em: I think thou
        manuredest thy chin with the droppings of eggs and
        muskadine before it bristled. A shame take thee and thy
        loadstone! But ’tis no matter; master Placket the
        paritor[370] has cited you, and you shall answer it.
          GLI. O the raging jealousy of a woman! Do you hear,
        wife? I will shew myself a man of sense, and answer you
        with silence; or like a man of wisdom, speak in brief: I
        say you are a scold, and beware the cucking-stool.[371]
                                                       [_Exit._
          MIS. G. I say you are a ninnihammer, and beware the
        cuckoo; for as sure as I have ware, I’ll traffic with
        the next merchant venturer: and in good time here
        come[372] gallants of the right trade.

         _Enter_ LIPSALVE _and_ GUDGEON, _and_ GLISTER _behind
                            watching them_.

          LIP. All alone, mistress Glister? meditating who shall
        be your next child’s father?
          GUD. Indeed, methinks, that should be one end of her
        thought, an’t be but to cry quittance with her husband,
        of whose abuse the town rings.
          GLI. Flax and fire, flax and fire! here are fellows come
        in the nick, to light their matches at my tinder.
                                                      [_Aside._
          LIP. He tells you true, mistress Glister: the doctor
        hath made you ordinary in our ordinaries; satires whet
        their tooths, and steep rods in piss, epigrams lie in
        poetry’s pickle, and we shall have rhyme out of all
        reason against you.
          GUD. Ere long he will take up his station at a
        stationer’s, where we shall see him do penance in a
        sheet at least.
          MIS. G. O, I am nettled! my patience is so provoked,
        that I must doff my modesty: what shall I do? if ye be
        honest gentlemen, counsel me in my revenge, teach me
        what to do, make my case your own.
          LIP. Why, you are in the common road of revenge: take
        which hand you will, you cannot go out o’ your way; ’tis
        as soon taken as time by his forepart.
          GUD. Faith, since he has strook with the sword, strike
        you with the scabbard; in plain terms, cuckold him: you
        may as easily do’t as lie down o’ your bed.
          GLI. This gear cottens,[373] i’faith.       [_Aside._
          MIS. G. I apprehend you, gentlemen. Lord, how much
        better are two heads than one to make one large head!
          LIP. You say true, mistress Glister: there’s help
        required in grafting; and how happily we come to tender
        our service! Let our pretence be to take physic of the
        doctor; and that he may with as much ease minister to us
        as we to you, we’ll take a lodging in his house.
          GUD. How say you to this? is the colour[374] good?
        does’t like[375] you?
          MIS. G. Passing well: the colour is so good, that you
        shall wear my favour out o’ the same piece.
          LIP. Excellent, excellent!—Now shall we be revenged for
        the whipping.—Mistress Glister, let me be your first
        man.
          GUD. Nay, soft, sir, I plied her as soon as you.
          GLI. I should have an oar in her boat too by right.
                 _Aside._
          LIP. How ill-advised were you to marry one with a red
        beard!
          MIS. G. O master Lipsalve, I am not the first that has
        fallen under that ensign! there’s no complexion more
        attractive in this time for women than gold and red
        beards: such men are all liver.[376]
          GUD. Ay, but small heart, and less honesty.
          LIP. Yes, they are honest too in some kind, for they’ll
        beg before they’ll steal.
          GUD. That’s true; for, for one that holds up his hand at
        the sessions, you shall have ten come into the bawdy
        court.
          GLI. Was ever beard so back-bitten? this were enough
        to make red beards turn medley, and dash ’em clean
        out of countenance; but I hope, like mine, they fear
        no colours. And[377] you were ten courtiers, I’ll
        front you: I must give you physic, with a pox! well,
        if I pepper ye not, call me doctor Doddipoll.[378]
        [_Aside._]—Master Lipsalve and master Gudgeon, you
        are heartily welcome; I am very glad to see you
        well.
          LIP. O master doctor, your salutation is very
        suspicious!
          GLI. Why, master Lipsalve?
          LIP. It can scarce be hearty, for physicians are rather
        glad to see men ill than well.
          GLI. Not so, sir; you must distinguish of men; though
        this I know, virtue is not the end of all science,
        which commonly keeps the professor poor; some study
        questuary[379] and gainful arts, and every one would
        thrive in’s calling: but, i’faith, gentlemen, what
        wind drives you hither?
          GUD. The wind-colic, master doctor, or some such
        disease.
          GLI. But not the stone-colic?
          LIP. O no, sir, we have no obstructions in those parts;
        we are loose enough there.
          GLI. If you were troubled with that, my wife can tell
        you of an excellent remedy.
          GUD. We need it not, we need it not: but indeed, master
        doctor, for some private infirmities (which our waters
        shall make known to you), we desire to take some physic
        of you for a few days; and to that end we would take a
        lodging in your house during the time.
          LIP. Shall we entreat your favour?
          GLI. No entreaty, gentlemen; you shall command me to
        search the very profundity of my skill for you.—Have
        them in, wife, and shew them their lodging.—I will think
        upon another receipt, and follow you immediately.
          GUD. And, i’faith, we shall requite your pains to the
        full.
               [_Exeunt_ MIS. GLISTER, LIPSALVE, _and_ GUDGEON.
          GLI. To the fool, you mean: I know you ha’ the horn of
        plenty for me, which you would derive unto me from the
        liberality of your bawdies,[380] not your minds. Here
        are lords that, having learned the O P Q of courtship,
        travel up and down among citizens’ wives, to shew their
        learning and bringing up; as if the city were not
        already a good proficient in the court horn-book: yes, I
        warrant, they have heads as capable as other men; ay,
        and some of them can wisely say with the philosopher,
        that in knowing all, they know nothing. Well, because I
        am of the livery, and pay scot and lot amongst you, do
        but observe how I’ll fetch over my gallants for your
        sakes. They say I am of the right hair; and, indeed,
        they may stand to’t, and hold the position good, saving
        with my wife.—Soft; are they not at _pro_ and _contra_
        already? I know they are hot-spurs, and I must have an
        eye to the main. They have been whipt already for
        lechery, and yet the pride of the flesh pricks ’em.
        Well, I must in: I’ve[381] given them such a pill
        Shall take ’em down; for lust must have his fill.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                  _Another Room in_ GLISTER’S _House_.

                      _Enter_ MARIA _above_.[382]

          MAR. Now nature’s pencil and the hand of time
        Give[383] life and limb to generation’s act,
        My shame and guilt in wordless notes appear,
        The argument of scorn. O now I stand
        The theme and comment to each liberal[384] tongue,
        Whilst hope breeds comfort, and fear threats my wrong!
        O Gerardine, how oft thy lively figure,
        Deeply[385] impressed in my yielding temper,
        Assures me thou art mine! how fancy paints
        Thy true proportion in my troubled sleep,
        Because sole subject of my daily thoughts!
        O, if thy vows prove feign’d and thou unjust,
        I say and swear in men there is no trust!

                           _Enter_ GERARDINE.

          GER. Thus have I past the round[386] and court of
           guard,
        Without the word:[387] either conceit is strong,
        Or else the body where true love’s confin’d
        Walks as a spirit and doth force his way
        Through greatest dangers, frightful to those eyes
        That wait to intercept him.—Maria?
        How like to Cynthia, in her silver orb,
        She seems to me, attended by love’s lamp,
        Whose mutual influence and soul’s sympathy
        Do[388] shew heaven’s model in mortality.
          MAR. Gerardine?
        Aurora, now the blushing sun approaches,[389]
        Dart[s] not more comfort to this universe
        Than thou to me: most acceptably come!
        The art of number cannot count the hours
        Thou hast been absent.
          GER. Infinity of love
        Holds no proportion with arithmetic.
        Think not, Maria, but my heart retains
        A deep impression of such thoughts as these.
        I have been forging of a mirthful plot
        To celebrate our wish’d conjunction,
        Which now digested, come to summon thee
        To be an actress in the comedy.
          MAR. How, where, when? speak, mine ears are quick to
             hear;
        I stand on thorns already to be there.
          GER. At Dryfat’s house, the merchant, there’s our
             scene,
        Whose sequel, if I fail not in intent,
        Shall answer our desires and each content.
        But when sawest thou Lipsalve and Gudgeon, our two
           gallants?
          MAR. They are here in the house, so handled by mine
        uncle, that they are the pitifullest patients that ever
        you beheld.
          GER. No matter, he serves them in their kind: they were
        infamous in the court, and now are grown as notorious in
        the city: they may happily prove particles in our sport,
        and fit subjects for laughter.

        Time calls me hence: adieu; prepare to meet.
          MAR. I shall outstrip the nimblest in my feet.
                                           [_Exeunt severally._


                               SCENE III.


                     _A Room in_ DRYFAT’S _House_.

        _Enter_ DRYFAT _disguised as a proctor, and_ CLUB _as a
                                crier_.

          DRY. Come, Club, come, there’s a merry fray
        towards;[390] we shall see the death of melancholy;
        wherein thou and I must call a grand jury of jests
        together, and pass upon them with the club law.
          CLUB. Now, as I am O the crier, and yet but a young
        club, I have not yet practised that law: you have a
        whole dryfat on’t; I pray you, instruct me.
          DRY. Why, ’tis a law enacted, by the common council of
        statute-caps,[391] to qualify the rage of the time, to
        follow, to call back, and sometimes to encounter
        gentlemen when they run in arrearages; I tell thee,
        there’s no averment against our book-cases. ’Tis the law
        called make-peace: it makes them even when they are at
        odds; it shews ’em a flat case as plain as a pack-staff,
        that is, knocks ’em down without circumstance.
          CLUB. Ay, marry, I like that law well; ’tis studied with
        the turning of a hand: there’s no quiddits nor pedlar’s
        French[392] in’t; there needs no book for th’ exposition
        o’ th’ terms; ’tis as easily learned as the felling of
        wood and getting of children; all is but laying on load
        the downright blow.
          DRY. Ay, and by the way of exhortation it prints this
        moral sentence on their costards,[393] in capital
        letters, _Agree, for the law is costly_.
          CLUB. Good, good: but all this while there’s no doctor
        thought on; we must have one to arbitrate.
          DRY. Why, master Gerardine, man, has his name for the
        purpose: he shall be called doctor Stickler: _lupus est
        in fabula_, here he comes.

                           _Enter_ GERARDINE.

          GER. How now, lads? does our conceit cotten?[394] ha’
        you summoned your wits from woolgathering? are you
        fraught with matter for this merriment?
          DRY. Full, full: we are in labour, man, and we shall die
        without midwifery.
          CLUB. We are ravished with delight, like the wench that
        was got with child against her stomach. O, but[395] if
        we could wrest this smock-law now in hand to our
        club-law, it were excellent!
          DRY. Easily, easily: all shall be called the club-law.
          GER. As how?
          DRY. Why, thus. Club is the crier; I am Poppin[396] the
        proctor; and you Stickler the doctor: he calls them to
        appear; I must be of their counsel, and you must attone
        them.[397] We may know their cases and be in their
        elements, mark you me, but they cannot be in ours. Tut,
        none knows our secrets: we can speak fustian above their
        understanding, and make asses’ ears attentive. I’ll play
        Ambidexter,[398] tell ’em ’tis a plain case, and put ’em
        down with the club-law; so that, as Club said well e’en
        now, our knavery is as near allied as felling of wood
        and getting of children.
          GER. Excellent, excellent! By this they are at hand:
        let’s bear these things like ourselves: I’ll withdraw
        and put on my habiliments, and then enter for the
        doctor.
          DRY. Do so: they come, they come.  [_Exit_ GERARDINE.

                      _Enter_ GLISTER _and_ PURGE.

        Welcome, master doctor Glister and master Purge: there’s
        a commission to be sat upon this day, to open a passage
        for imprisoned truth, concerning acts yet _in tenebris_.
          GLI. True; I am brought hither by the malice of my wife.
          PUR. And I have a just appeal against my wife.
          GLI. Master Poppin[399]—so I think you are called—I
        understand you have the law at your fingers’ ends.
          DRY. I can box cases, and scold and scratch it out
        amongst them.
          GLI. Indeed, fame reports you to be a good trumpeter of
        causes: I must retain you, sir, to sound mine.
          DRY. My sackbut shall do it most pathetically: tell me,
        in brief, the nature of your case.
          GLI. Faith, sir, a scandalous letter devised to wrong my
        reputation, about a bastard in the country which should
        be mine.
          DRY. About a bastard in the country which should be
        yours? hum,—’tis very like you then, it should seem.
          GLI. O no, sir! understand me, only fathered upon me.
          DRY. Only fathered upon you _cum nemini[400] obtrudi
        potest_: I understand you, and like you well too, you do
        not flatter yourself in your own case, no, ’tis not
        good: well, what more?
          GLI. And about my niece, got with child in my own house.
          DRY. Byrlady,[401] burdens of some weight, which you
        make light of! you deny?
          GLI. What else, sir? I have reason.
          DRY. I know it well, I take you for no beast: believe
        me, master doctor, denial and reason are two main
        grounds; stand upon them, and you cannot err.—Your case,
        master Purge?
          PUR. First take your fee, master Poppin,[402] that you
        may have the more feeling, and urge it home when you
        come to’t. [_Gives money._] Mine is a discovery of my
        wife’s iniquity at the Family of Love.
          DRY. Otherwise called the House of Venery, where they
        hunger and thirst for’t.
          PUR. True, sir: you have heard of the Hole in the Wall,
        where they assemble together in the daytime, like so
        many bees under a hive?
          DRY. Come home _crura thymo plena_, and lodge among
        hornets, is’t not so?
          PUR. I cannot tell, sir; but, for my part, I am much
        noted as I go.
          DRY. No doubt of that, sir; your wife can furnish you
        with notes out of her cotations.[403]
          CLUB. Ay, and give him a two-tagged point[404] to tie
        ’em together.
          DRY. But how came you to detect her?
          PUR. Why, thus, sir: getting the word, I dogged her to
        the Family, where, closing with her, I whispered so
        pleasing a tale in her ear, that I got from her her
        wedding-ring; and here ’tis.
          DRY. Well, out of that ring we will wring matter that
        shall carry meat i’ th’ mouth. But what witness or proof
        can you produce to make good your wife’s iniquity and
        your own cuckoldry?
          PUR. Master Lipsalve and master Gudgeon, who were her
        companions at that same time.
          DRY. Very good.—Are they cited in the _quorum nomina_?
          CLUB. They will be here, sir.
          GLI. If they be, they will bewray[405] all.
          DRY. So much the better; ’twill savour well for master
        Purge.
          PUR. You understand my case now?
          GLI. And mine too, sir?
          DRY. I do, I do: they are as different as a doctor and a
        dunce, a man and a beast: here’s the compendium; yours,
        master doctor, stands upon the negative; and yours,
        master Purge, upon the affirmative: _pauca sapienti_, I
        ha’t, I ha’t.
          PUR. Mine is very current, sir; I can shew you good
        guilt.
          DRY. Ay, marry, there spoke an angel;[406] gilt’s[407]
        current, indeed: let me feel’t, let me feel’t.
          PUR. I mean, my wife’s guilt.
          GLI. Master Poppin, you shall have innocence to speak
        for me.
          DRY. Tut, innocence is a fool, I care not for’s company;
        I can speak enough without him.
          GLI. Then, I hope, you will be as good to us as the
        five-finger at maw.[408]

          DRY. No, rather as Hercules, to lip-labour ’em with the
        club-law: tut, let me alone.

         _Enter_ MISTRESS GLISTER, MISTRESS PURGE, _and_ MARIA.

          MIS. G. O, are you here, sir? I have brought you a full
        barn to glut your greedy appetite: if you have any maw,
        feed here till you choke again. Now shall I see the
        whole carcass of your knavery ript up: if thou hast any
        grace, now will thy red beard turn white upon’t.
          MIS. P. O how have I been toss’d from post to pillar
        In this libidinous world! The yoke I bear
        Is so uneven, as if an innocent lamb
        And a mad hare-brain’d ox should draw together:
        But I must have patience, there’s no remedy.
          DRY. There’s some difference between these two tempers.
          GLI. I would give a hundred pounds my wife had so gentle
        a spirit.                                     [_Aside._
          PUR. My wife must needs be gentle, for she can bear
        double.                                       [_Aside._

             _Re-enter_ GERARDINE, _disguised as a doctor_.

          DRY. Here comes master doctor: now rig up your vessels,
        every one to his tackling.
          GER. Good day to all at once, and peace amongst you!—
        Fie, how I sweat! I think Vulcan ne’er toiled so at his
        anvil as I have done, and all to make maid’s water to
        slake Cupid’s fire, and to turn his shafts from the
        feather-bed to the bed-post, from the heart to the
        heel.—
        Come, master Poppin, shall we to this gear?[409]
          DRY. Reverend doctor, we have stayed your coming.—Crier,
        cry silence.
          CLUB. Silence![410]
          DRY. Master doctor, I have heard in general terms the
        tales of master doctor Glister and master Purge, which
        have in mutual manner jumped into the quagmire of my
        mind; out of which quagmire, by your enforcement and
        mine own duty, I pluck them up by the ears, and thus, in
        naked apparance,[411] I present them.
          GER. _Ad rem, ad rem_, master Poppin; leave your
        allegories, your metaphors, and circumlocutions, and to
        the point.
          DRY. Then briefly thus: I have compared their tales,—how
        short they will come of their wives’ I know not: and
        first for mistress Purge.—Crier, call mistress Purge.
          CLUB. Rebecca Purge, wife to Peter Purge, ’pothecary,
        appear upon thy purgation, upon pain of excommunication.
          MIS. P. Here I am,—O time’s impiety!—
        Hither I come from out the harmless fold
        To have my good name eaten up by wolves:
        See, how they grin! Well, the weak must to the wall;
        I must bear wrong, but shame shall them befall.
          GER. Who is her accuser?
          DRY. Her own husband, upon the late discovery of a crew
        of narrow-ruffed,[412] strait-laced, yet loose-bodied
        dames, with a rout[413] of omnium-gatherums, assembled
        by the title of the Family of Love: which, master
        doctor, if they be not punished and suppressed by our
        club-law, each man’s copyhold will become freehold,
        specialities will turn to generalities, and so from
        unity to parity, from parity to plurality, and from
        plurality to universality; their wives, the only
        ornaments of their houses, and of all their wares,
        goods, and chattel[s], the chief moveables, will be made
        common.
          PUR. Most voluble and eloquent proctor!
          GER. Byrlady,[414] these enormities must and shall be
        redressed, otherwise I see their charter will be
        infringed, and their ancient staff of government the
        club, from whence we derive our law of castigation,—this
        club, I say (they seeming nothing less than men by their
        fore-part), will be turned upon their own heads.—Speak,
        Rebecca Purge; art thou one of this Family? hast thou
        ever known the body of any man there or elsewhere
        concupiscentically?
          MIS. P. No, master doctor, those are but devices of the
        wicked to trap the innocent; but I thank my spirit I
        have fear before my eyes, which my husband sees not,
        because something hangs in’s light.
          PUR. That’s my horns; she flouts me to my face, and I
        will not endure it: I shall carry her mark to my grave.
        [_Aside._]—Master doctor, she has given me that, that
        Æsculapius, were he now extant, could not heal, nor
        _edax rerum_[415] take away.
          GER. Produce your witness, master Purge, and blow not
        your own horn.
          PUR. Master Lipsalve and master Gudgeon, let them be
        called.
          CLUB. Lawrence Lipsalve and Gregory Gudgeon, late of
        _hic et ubique_, in the county of _nusquam_, gentlemen,
        come into the court and give your evidence, upon pain of
        that which shall ensue.

        _Enter_ LIPSALVE _and_ GUDGEON.
          GLI. Here they come, in pain I warrant them.—How works
        your physic, gallants? do you go well to the ground? now
        cuckold the doctor!—Wife, who’s your first man now?—now
        strike[416] with the scabbard! ha, ha, ha!
          GUD. A villanous doctor!
          LIP. Mountebank, you’re a rascal, and we will cast
        about[417] to be revenged.
          DRY. Cast about this way and bewray[418] what you can
        concerning mistress Purge, who stands here upon her
        purgation, either to prove mundified or contaminated,
        according to the tenor-piece of your principal
        evidence.—First give ’em the book.
          CLUB. Come, lay your hands upon the book: you shall
        speak and aver no more, nor wade no farther into the
        cream-pots of this woman’s crime, than the naked truth
        and the cart-rope of your conscience shall conduct you,
        so help you the contents! Kiss the book.[419]
          LIP. Alas, we are not in case to answer largely! but if
        you will have our evidence in brief, I think I kissed
        her at the Family some three times, once at coming, once
        at going, and once in the midst; otherwise never knew
        her dishonestly.
          PUR. Ay, mark that middle kiss, master doctor.
          GUD. And for my part, I have been more mortified by her
        than ever I was provoked.
          GER. How say you to this, master Purge? your witness is
        weak, and, sir-reverence[420] on[’t], without sounder
        proof, they may depart to the close-stool whence they
        came, and you to your ’pothecary’s shop.
          PUR. No, master doctor, I have another bolt to shoot
        that shall strike her dead; she shall not have a word to
        say.
          DRY. Answer me to this, mistress Purge; where’s your
        wedding-ring?
          MIS. P. My wedding-ring? why, what should I do with
        unnecessary things about me, when the poor begs at my
        gate ready to starve? Is it not better, as I learned
        last lecture, to send my substance before me, where I
        may find it, than to leave it behind me, where I must
        forego it? Yes, verily: wherefore, to put you out of
        doubt, I have given that ring to charitable uses.
          DRY. Nay, now she falters: my client can shew that ring,
        got from her at the Family, when these two courtling[s]
        had at the same time beleaguered her fort.
          GER. This alters the case clean.—What starting-hole ha’
        you now, mistress Purge?
          MIS. P. E’en the sanctuary of a safe conscience: now,
        truly, truly, however he came by that ring, by my
        sisterhood, I gave it to the relief of the distressed
        Geneva.
          PUR. How? to the relief of the distressed Geneva?—
        Justice, master doctor! I may now decline _victus_,
        _victa_, _victum_; one word more shall overthrow her. I
        myself was a Familist that day, who, more jealous than
        zealous in devotion, thrust in amongst the rest (as I
        had most right), on purpose to sound her, to find out
        the knavery: short tale to make, I got her ring, and
        here it is; let her deny it if she can: and what more I
        discovered _non est nunc narrandi locus_.
          MIS. P. Husband, I see you are hoodwinked in the right
        use of feeling and knowledge,—as if I knew you not[421]
        then as well as the child knows his own father! Look in
        the posy of my ring: does it not tell you that we two
        are one flesh? and hath not fellow-feeling taught us to
        know one another as well by night as by day? Husband,
        husband, will you do as the blind jade, break your neck
        down a hill because you see it not? ha’ you no light of
        nature in that flesh of yours?—Now, as true as I live,
        master doctor, I had a secret operation, and I knew him
        then to be my husband e’en by very instinct.
          PUR. Impudence, dost not blush? art not ashamed to lie
        so abominable?
          MIS. P. No, husband, rather be you ashamed of your own
        weakness; for, for my part, I neither fear nor shame
        what man can do unto me.
          GER. Master Purge, I see you have spent your pith;
        therefore best make a full point at the ring, and attend
        our pleasure.—Master Poppin,[422] proceed to the rest.
          DRY. Crier, call doctor Glister.
          CLUB. Doctor Glister, alias suppositor doctor[423] of
        physic, appear upon thy purgation, upon the belly-pain
        that may ensue thereon.[424]
          GLI. Here, master doctor.
          GER. Who is his accuser?
          DRY. His clamorous wife, who seems to enforce a
        separation about a bastard in the country, which should
        be his, only fathered upon him.
          GER. What proof of that?
          MIS. G. Proof unanswerable, master doctor, the
        nurse’s letter: let it be read; but first observe
        his countenance; it may be his blushing will bewray
        his guilt.
          GER. Now, by this light, I thought it had indeed, but I
        see ’tis but the reflection of his beard.—Read the
        letter, master Poppin.[425]
          DRY.[426] [_reads_] _After my hearty commendations
        remembered unto your worshipful doctorship, trusting in
        God that you are as well as I was at the making hereof,
        thanks be to him therefor! the cause of my writing unto
        you at this time is to let you understand that your
        little son is turned a ragged colt, a very stripling;
        for, being now stript of all his clothing, his backside
        wants a tail-piece, commends itself to your fatherly
        consideration. Woe worth the time that ever I gave suck
        to a child that came in at the window, God knows how!
        Yet if you did but see how like the pert, little,
        red-headed knave is to his father, and how like a
        cock-sparrow he mouses and touses my little Bess
        already, you would take him for your own, and pay me my
        hire. I write not of the want of one thing, for I want
        all things; wherefore take some speedy order, or else as
        naked as he came from the mother will I send him to the
        father. From Pis.[427] the xxii of —— Your poor nurse_,
        THOMASINE TWEEDLES.
          GLI. Master doctor, truth needs not the foil of
        rhetoric; I will only in _monosyllaba_ answer for myself
        (as sometimes a wise man did): such and such things are
        laid to my charge, which I deny; you may think of me
        what you please, but I am as innocent in this as the
        child new-born.
          GER. Why, there’s partly a confession: the child, we
        know, is innocent, and not new-born neither, for it
        should seem by the letter he is able to call his dad
        knave.
          GLI. You take me wrong, master doctor.[428]
          DRY. Under correction, thus much can I say for my
        client’s justification. Indeed he hath travelled well in
        the beating of pulses, and hath been much conversant in
        women’s Jordans; but he had ever a care to raise
        his patient being before cast down: his charitable
        disposition hath been such to poor folk, that he never
        took above fourpence for the casting of a water, which
        good custom was so well known among all his patients,
        that if sixpence were at any time offered him, they
        might be bold to ask and have twopence again. He hath
        been so skilful and painful withal in the cure of the
        green sickness, that, of my knowledge, he hath risen at
        all hours in the night to pleasure maids that have had
        it: and for that foul-mouthed disease, termed by a
        fine phrase—a pox on’t, what d’ye call’t? O, the
        grincomes[429]—at that he hath played his doctor’s
        prize, and writes _nil ultra_ to all mountebanks; so
        that the wise woman in Pissing-Alley, nor she in
        Do-little-Lane, are more famous for good deeds than he.
        Then, master doctor, out of these presumptions, besides
        his flat denial (a more infallible ground), you may
        gather his innocence, and let him have his purgation.
          GER. No, master Poppin,[430] it is not so to be foisted
        off.
          MIS. G. Nay, master doctor, what say you to his own
        niece, that looks big upon him? an arrow that sticks for
        the upshot against all comers; which by his restraint of
        her from master Gerardine, an honest gentleman that
        loved her, and upon that colour[431] from the sight and
        intercourse of other men, must, by all presumptions, be
        his own act.
          GER. O monstrous! this is a foul blot in your
        tables[432] indeed.
          GLI. Wife, thou hast no shame nor womanhood in thee; thy
        conscience knows me.
          MIS. G. True of thy flesh, who knows not that? thy
        beard speaks for thee: ay, ay, thou liest by me like a
        stone, but abroad thou’rt like a stone-horse, you old
        limb-lifter![433]
          DRY. Cease your clamour, and attend my speech.—Most
        worshipful, reverend, and judicial doctor, for the
        quickening of your memory, I will give you a breviat of
        all that hath been spoken. Master doctor Glister hath a
        cradleful and a bellyful, you see, thrust upon him; and
        master Purge a headful.—Your wife is an angry honeyless
        wasp, whose sting, I hope, you need not fear,—and yours
        carries honey in her mouth, but her sting makes your
        forehead swell:—your wife makes you deaf with the shrill
        treble of her tongue,—and yours makes you horn-mad with
        the tenor of her tale.—In fine, master doctor’s refuge
        is his conscience, and master Purge runs at his wife’s
        ring.[434]
          GER. _Summa totalis_, a good audit ha’ you made,
        master Poppin.[435]—Now attend my arbitrement. For
        you, gallants, though you have incurred the danger
        of the law by using counterfeit keys, and putting
        your hands into the wrong pocket, yet because I see
        you punished and purged already, my advice is, that
        you learn the A B C of better manners: go back and
        tell how you have been used in the city; and being
        thus scoured, keep yourselves clean, and the bed
        undefiled.—For you, master Purge, because I see your
        evidence insufficient, and indeed too weak, to foil
        your wife’s uprightness, and seeing jealousy and
        unkindness have[436] only made her a stranger in
        your land of Ham, my counsel is, that you readvance
        your standard, give her new press-money.
          PUR. You may enjoin me, sir, but——
          GER. But not at me, man: I will enjoin you, and conjoin
        you, and briefly thus. You have your ring that has made
        this combustion and uproar: that keep still; wear it;
        and here, by my edict, be it proclaimed to all that are
        jealous, to wear their wives’ ring[s] still on their
        fingers, as best for their security, and the only charm
        against cuckoldry.
          PUR. Then, wife, at master doctor’s enjoinment,[437] so
        thou wilt promise me to come no more at the Family, I
        receive thee into the lists of my favour.
          MIS. P. Truly, husband, my love must be free still to
        God’s creatures: yea, nevertheless, preserving you still
        as the head of my body, I will do as the spirit shall
        enable me.
          GER. Go to, thou hast a good wife, and there[’s] an
        end.—Upon you, master doctor, being solicited by so
        apparent proof, I can do no less than pronounce a severe
        sentence; and yet, i’faith, the reverence of your
        calling and profession doth somewhat check my austerity:
        what if master Gerardine, by my persuasion, would yet be
        induced to take your niece, and father the child? would
        you launch with a thousand pound, besides her father’s
        portion?
          GLI. Master doctor, I would, were it but to redeem her
        lost good name.
          GER. Then, foreknowing what would happen, I thought
        good, in master Gerardine’s name, to have this bond
        ready, which if you seal to, he shall take her with all
        faults.
          GLI. That will I instantly.       [_Seals the bond._]
        So, this is done; which, together with my niece, do
        I deliver by these presents to the use of master
        Gerardine.
          GER. He thanks you heartily, and lets you know,
                       [GERARDINE, DRYFAT, _and_ CLUB _discover
                                 themselves_.
        That Indian mines and Tagus’ glistering ore
        To this bequest were unto me but poor.
          GLI. What? Gerardine, Dryfat, and Club!
          DRY. The very[438] same.
          CLUB. You are welcome to our club-law.
          GER. Cease admiration here: what doubt remains
        I’ll satisfy at full. Now join with me
        For approbation of our Family.


                             EPILOGUE.[439]

        Gentles, whose favour[s] have o’erspread this place,
        And shed the real influence of grace
        On harmless mirth, we thank you; for our hope
        Attracts such vigour and unmeasur’d scope
        From the reflecting splendour of your eyes,
        That, grace presum’d, fear in oblivion dies.
        Your judgment, as it is the touch[440] and trier
        Of good from bad, so from your hearts comes fire,
        That gives both ardour to the wit refin’d,
        And sweetness [to] th’ incense of each willing mind.
        O may that fire ne’er die! nor let your favours
        Depart from us: give countenance to their labours
        Propos’d a sacrifice, which may no less
        Their strong desires than our true zeals express.
                                               [_Exeunt omnes._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          YOUR FIVE GALLANTS.




              _Your fiue Gallants. As it hath beene often in
              Action at the Black-friers. Written by T.
              Middleton. Imprinted at London for Richard Bonian,
              dwelling at the signe of the Spred-Eagle, right
              ouer-against the great North dore of Saint Paules
              Church._ n. d. 4to.

              _Fyve Wittie Gallants_ was licensed by Sir George
              Bucke, 22d March 1607-8: see Chalmers’s _Suppl.
              Apol._, p. 202.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.


              FRIPPERY, _the broker-gallant_.
              PRIMERO, _the bawd-gallant_.
              GOLDSTONE, _the cheating-gallant_.
              PURSENET, _the pocket-gallant_.
              TAILBY, _the whore-gallant_.
              FITSGRAVE, _a gentleman_.
              BUNGLER, _cousin to_ MISTRESS NEWCUT.
              PYAMONT.
              ARTHUR, _servant to_ FRIPPERY.
              FULK, _servant to_ GOLDSTONE.
              _Boy_, _servant to_ PURSENET.
              JACK, _servant to_ TAILBY.
              MARMADUKE, _servant to_ MISTRESS NEWCUT.
              _Gentlemen_, _Tailor_, _Painter_, _&c._

              KATHERINE, _a wealthy orphan_.
              MISTRESS NEWCUT, _a merchant’s wife_.
              _Novice._
              _Courtesans._


              Scene, LONDON, except during part of the third
              act, which is laid in Combe-Park and its
              neighbourhood.




                             YOUR FIVE GALLANTS.

                             --------------

_Presenter, or Prologue,[441] passing over the stage; the
    bawd-gallant_ [PRIMERO], _with three wenches gallantly
    attired, meets him; the whore-gallant_ [TAILBY], _the
    pocket-gallant_ [PURSENET], _the cheating-gallant_
    [GOLDSTONE], _kiss these three wenches, and depart in a
    little whisper and wanton action. Now, for the other, the
    broker-gallant_ [FRIPPERY], _he sits at home yet, I warrant
    you, at this time of day, summing up his pawns_. Hactenus
    quasi inductio, _a little glimpse giving_.


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


                _A Room in_ FRIPPERY’S _House_. FRIPPERY
           _discovered[442] summing up his pawns, one fellow
                           standing by him_.

                 _Enter_ ARTHUR _and a second fellow_.

          AR. Is your pawn good and sound, sir?
          SEC. F. I’ll pawn my life for that, sir.
          AR. Place yourself there then; I will seek to prefer it
        presently. My master is very jealous[443] of the
        pestilence; marry, the pox sits at meat and meal with
        him.                          [_Second fellow retires._
          FRI. [_reading_] _Lent the fifth day of September to
        mistress Onset upon her gown_, [_and_] _taffeta
        petticoat with three broad silver laces, three pound
        fifteen shillings_.
          _Lent to Justice Cropshin upon both his velvet jackets
        five pound ten shillings._
          _Lent privately to my Lady Newcut upon her gilt
        casting-bottle[444] and her silver lie-pot fifty-five
        shillings._
          AR. Sir——
          FRI. [_reads_] _Lent to Sir Oliver Needy upon his
        taffeta cloak, beaver hat, and perfumed leather-jerkin,
        six pound five shillings._
          AR. May it please your worship——
          FRI. [_reads_] _Lent to master Andrew Lucifer upon his
        flame-coloured doublet and blue taffeta hose_[445]—top
        the candle, sirrah; methinks the light burns blue: when
        came that suit in?
          AR. ’T’as lain above the year now.
          FRI. Fire and brimstone! cut it out into matches; the
        white linings will serve for tinder.
          AR. And with little help, sir; they are almost black
        enough already. Sir, here’s another come with a pawn.
          FRI. Keep him aside awhile, and reach me hither the bill
        of the last week.
          AR. ’Tis here at hand, sir.
          FRI. Now, sir, what’s your pawn?
          FIRST F. The second part of a gentlewoman’s gown, sir;
        the lower half, I mean.
          FRI. I apprehend you easily, the breeches of the gown.
          FIRST F. Very proper; for she wears the doublet at home,
        a guest that lies in my house, sir; she looks every hour
        for her cousin out a’ th’ country.
          FRI. O, her cousin lies here; ’a may mistake in that. My
        friend, of what parish is your pawn?
          FIRST F. Parish? why, Saint Clement’s, sir.
          FRI. I’ll come to you presently.[446]—What parish is
        your pawn, my friend? [_reads_] _Saint Bride’s_, 5;
        _Saint Dunstan’s, none_; _Saint Clement’s_, 3. Three at
        Clement’s?—Away with your pawn, sir! your parish is
        infected; I will neither purchase the plague for
        sixpence in the pound and a groat bill-money, nor
        venture my small stock into contagious parishes: you
        have your answer; fare you well, as fast as you can,
        sir.
          FIRST F. The pox arrest you, sir, at the suit of the
        suburbs!
          FRI. Ay, welcome, welcome.
          FIRST F. For, I think, plague scorns your company.
                                                       [_Exit._
          FRI. I rank with chief gallants; I love to smell safely.
        [_Reads_] _Lent in the vacation to master Proctor upon
        his spiritual gown five angels,[447] and upon his
        corporal doublet fifteen shillings; sum, three pound
        five shillings._
          AR. Sir——
          FRI. Now, sir?
          AR. [_bringing forward a trunk._] Here’s one come in
        with a trunk of apparel.
          FRI. Whence comes it?
          AR. From Saint Martin’s-in-the-Field.
          FRI. Saint Martin’s-in-the-Field? [_reads_] _Saint Mary
        Maudlin_, 2; _Saint Martin’s, none_: here’s an honest
        fellow; let him appear, sir.
          AR. You may come near, sir.
          FRI. O welcome, welcome; what’s your pawn, sir?
          SEC. F. Faith, a gentlewoman’s whole suit, sir.
          FRI. Whole suit? ’tis well.
          SEC. F. A poor, kind soul, troubled with a bad husband;
        one that puts her to her shifts here.
          FRI. He puts her from her shifts, methinks, when she is
        fain to pawn her clothes.
          SEC. F. Look you, sir; a fair satin gown, new taffeta
        petticoat——
          FRI. Stay, this petticoat has been turned.
          SEC. F. Often turned up and down, and[448] you will, but
        never turned, sir.
          FRI. Cry you mercy, indeed.
          SEC. F. A fine white beaver, pearl band, three
        falls;[449] I ha’ known her have more in her days.
          FRI. Alas, and she be but a gentlewoman of any count or
        charge, three falls are nothing in these days! know
        that: tut, the world’s changed; gentlewomen’s[450] falls
        stand upright now; no sin but has a bolster, that it may
        lie at ease. Well, what do you borrow of these, sir?
          SEC. F. Twelve pound, and you will, sir.
          FRI. How?
          SEC. F. They were not her’s for twenty.
          FRI. Why, so; our pawn is ever thrice the value of our
        money, unless in plate and jewels; how should the months
        be restored and the use else? We must cast it for the
        twelvemonth, so many pounds, so many months, so many
        eighteenpences; then the use of these eighteenpences;
        then the want of the return of those pounds: all these
        must be laid together; which well considered, the
        valuation of the pawn had need to sound treble. Can six
        pound pleasure the gentlewoman?
          SEC. F. It may please her, but, like a man of
        threescore, in the limberest degree.
          FRI. I have but one word more to say in’t; twenty
        nobles[451] is all and the utmost that I will hazard
        upon’t.
          SEC. F. She must be content with’t: the less borrowed,
        the better paid; come.
          FRI. Arthur.
          AR. At hand, sir.
          FRI. Tell out twenty nobles, and take her name in a
        bill.
          SEC. F. I’m satisfied, sir.      [_Exit with_ ARTHUR.
          FRI. Welcome, good Saint Martin’s-in-the-Field, welcome,
        welcome! I know no other name.

                            _Enter_ PRIMERO.

          PRI. What, so hard at your prayers?
          FRI. A little, sir; summing up my pawns here—what,
        master Primero, is it you, sir gallant? and how do[452]
        all the pretty sweet ladies, those plump, kind, delicate
        blisses, ha? whom I kiss in my very thoughts,—how do
        they, gallant?
          PRI. Why, gallant, if they should not do well in my
        house, where should it be done, boy? have I not a
        glorious situation?
          FRI. O, a gallant receipt,—violet air, curious garden,
        quaint walks, fantastical arbours, three back doors, and
        a coach-gate! nay, thou’rt admirably seated: little
        furniture will serve thee; thou’rt never without
        moveables.
          PRI. Ay, praise my stars! Ah, the goodly virginities
        that have been cut up in my house, and the goodly
        patrimonies that have lain like sops in the gravy! and
        when those sops were eaten, yet the meat was kept whole
        for another, and another, and another; for as in one pie
        twenty may dip their sippits, so upon one woman forty
        may consume their patrimonies.
          FRI. Excellent, master Primero!
          PRI. Well, I will[453] pray for women while I live;
        They’re the profitablest fools, I’ll say that for ’em,
        A man can keep ’bout his house; the prettiest kind fowl;
        So tame, so gentle, e’en to strangers’ hands
        So soon familiar; suffer to be touch’d
        Of those they ne’er saw twice: the dove’s not like ’em.
          FRI. Most certain, for that’s honest: but I have
        A suit to you.
          PRI. And so have I to you.
          FRI. That happens well: grant mine, and I’ll grant
             yours.
          PRI. A match.
          FRI. Make me perfect in that trick that got you so much
        at primero.[454]
          PRI. O, for the thread tied at your partner’s leg,
        The twitch?
          FRI. Ay, that twitch, and[455] you call it[456] so.
          PRI. That secret twitch got me five hundred pound
        Ere ’twas first known, and since I ha’ sold it well:
        Five hundred pound laid down shall not yet buy
        The fee-simple of my twitch: I would be here with’t.
        ’Twas a blest invention;
        I’d[457] been a beggar many a lousy year
        But for my twitch: it was the prettiest twitch!
        Many over-cheated gulls have fatted
        Me with the bottom of their patrimonies,
        E’en to the last sop, gaped while I fed ’em,
        Who now live by that art that first undid ’em.
        But I must swear you to be secret, close.
          FRI. As a maid at ten.
          PRI. Had you sworn but two years higher
        I would ne’er ha’ believ’d you.
          FRI. Nay, I let twelve alone,
        For after twelve has struck, maids look for one.
          PRI. I look for one too, and a maid, I think.
          FRI. What, to come hither?
          PRI. Sure, she follows me: a pretty, fat-eyed wench,
        with a Venus in her cheek: did but raiment smile upon
        her, she were nectar for great dons, boy: and that’s my
        suit to thee.
          FRI. And that’s granted already. Of what volume is this
        book, that I may fit a cover to’t?
          PRI. Faith, neither in folio nor in decimo sexto, but in
        octavo, between both; a pretty, middle-sized trug.[458]
          FRI. Then I have fitted her already, in my eye, i’faith.
        Here came a pawn in e’en now will make shift to serve
        her as fit!—look you, sir gallant[459]—satin, taffeta,
        beaver, fall,[460] and all.
          PRI. Is it new?
          FRI. New? you see it bears her youth as freshly——
          PRI. A pretty suit of clothes, i’faith: but put case the
        party should come to redeem ’em of a sudden?
          FRI. Pooh, then your wit’s sickly: have not I the
        policy, think you, to seem extreme busy, and defer ’em
        till the morrow? against which time that pawn shall be
        secretly fetched home, and another carried out to supply
        the place.
          PRI. I like thy craft well there.
          FRI. A general course. O, frippery[461] is an unknown
        benefit, sir gallant!
          PRI. And what must I give you for the hire now, i’faith?
          FRI. Of the whole suit, for the month?
          PRI. Ay, for the month.
          FRI. Go to, you shall give me but twelvepence a-day;
        master Primero, you’re a friend, and I’ll use you so:
        ’tis got up at your house in an afternoon, i’faith, the
        hire of the whole month: ye must think I can distinguish
        spirits, and put a difference between you and others;
        you pay no more, i’faith.
          PRI. I could have offered you no less myself.
          FRI. Tut, a man must use a friend as a friend may use
        him: your house has been a sweet house to me, both for
        pleasure and profit; I’ll give you your due: _omne tulit
        punctum_, you have always kept fine punks in your house,
        that’s for pleasure, _qui miscuit utile dulci_, and I
        have had sweet pawns from ’em, that’s for profit now.
          PRI. You flatter, you flatter, sir gallant,—but whist!
        here she enters: I prithee, question her.

                            _Enter Novice._

        O, you’re welcome!
          FRI. Is this your new scholar, master Primero?
          PRI. Marry is she, sir.
          FRI. I’ll commend your judgment in a wench while I
        live: that face will get money, i’faith; ’twill be a
        get-penny, I warrant you.—Go to, your fortune was
        choice, pretty bliss, to fall into the regard of so
        kind a gentleman.
          NOV. I hope so, sir.
          FRI. See what his care has provided already for you;
        you’ll be simply set out to the world! If you’ll have
        that care now to deserve his pains, O that will be
        acceptable! and these be the rudiments you must chiefly
        point at: to counterfeit cunningly, to wind in gentlemen
        with powerful attraction to keep his house in name and
        custom, to dissemble with your own brother, never to
        betray your fellows’ imperfections nor lay open the
        state of their bodies to strangers, to believe those
        that give you, to gull those that believe you, to laugh
        at all under taffeta; and these be your rudiments.
          PRI. There’s e’en all, i’faith; we’ll trouble you with
        no more; nay, you shall live at ease enough: for nimming
        away jewels and favours from gentlemen, which are your
        chief vails, [I] hope that will come naturally enough to
        you, I need not instruct you; you’ll have that wit, I
        trust, to make the most of your pleasure.
          NOV. I hope one’s mother-wit will serve for that, sir.
          PRI. O, properest of all, wench! it must be a she-wit
        that does those things, and thy mother was quick enough
        at it in her days.
          FRI. Give me leave, sister, to examine you upon two or
        three particulars:—and you make you ready,[462] be not
        ashamed; here’s none but friends—are you a maid?
          NOV. Yes, in the last quarter, sir.
          FRI. Very proper, that’s e’en going out: a maid in the
        last quarter, that’s a whore in the first: let me see,
        new moon on Thursday; she’ll be changed[463] by that
        time too. Are you willing to pleasure gentlemen?
          NOV. We are all born to pleasure our country, forsooth.
          FRI. Excellent! Can you carry yourself cunningly, and
        seem often holy?
          NOV. O, fear not that, sir! my friends were all
        Puritans.
          FRI. I’ll ne’er try her further.
          PRI. She’s done well, i’faith: I fear not now to turn
        her loose to any gentleman in Europe.
          FRI. You need not, sir: of her own accord, I think
        she’ll be loose enough without turning.—Arthur.

                           _Re-enter_ ARTHUR.

          AR. Here, sir.
          FRI. Go, make haste, shift her into that suit presently.
          AR. It shall be done.
          PRI. Arthur, do’t neatly, Arthur.
          AR. Fear’t not, sir.                         [_Exit._
          PRI. Follow him, wench.
          NOV. With all my heart, sir.                 [_Exit._
          PRI. But, mass, sir,[464]
        In what are we forgetful all this while!
          FRI. In what?
          PRI. The wooing business, man.
          FRI. Heart, that’s true!
          PRI. The gallants will prevent[465] us.
          FRI. Are you certain?
          PRI. I can avouch it: there’s a general meeting
        At the deceas’d knight’s house this afternoon;
        There’s rivalship enough.
          FRI. No doubt in that:
        Would either thou or I might bear her from ’em!
          PRI. My hopes are not yet faint.
          FRI. Nor mine.
          PRI. Tut, man,
        Nothing in women’s hearts sooner win[s] place
        Than a brave outside and an impudent face.
          FRI. And for both those we’ll fit it.
          PRI. Ay, if the devil be not in’t: make haste.
          FRI. I follow straight.              [_Exit_ PRIMERO.
        Vanish, thou fog, and sink beneath our brightness,
        Abashed at the splendour of such beams!
        We scorn thee, base eclipser of our glories,
        That wouldst have hid our shine from mortal’s eyes.
        Now, gallants, I’m[466] for you, ay, and perhaps before
           you:
        You can appear but glorious from yourselves,
        And have your beams but drawn from your own light,
        But mine from many,—many make me bright.
        Here’s a diamond that sometimes graced the finger of a
        countess; here sits a ruby that ne’er lins[467] blushing
        for the party that pawned it; here a sapphire. O
        providence and fortune! my beginning was so poor, I
        would fain forget it; and I take the only course, for I
        scorn to think on’t; slave to a trencher, observer of a
        salt-cellar, privy to nothing but a close-stool, or such
        unsavoury secret: but as I strive to forget the days of
        my serving, so I shall once remember the first step of
        my raising; for, having hardly raked five mark[s][468]
        together, I rejoiced so in that small stock, which most
        providently I ventured by water to Blackwall among
        fishwives; and in small time, what by weekly return and
        gainful restitution, it rize[469] to a great body,
        beside a dish of fish for a present, that stately
        preserved me a seven-night.

        Nor[470] ceas’d it there, but drew on greater profit;
        For I was held religious by those
        That do profess like abstinence,
        And was full often secretly supplied
        By charitable Catholics,
        Who censur’d[471] me sincerely abstinate,
        When merely I for hunger, not[472] for zeal,
        Eat up the fish, and put their alms to use!
        Ha, ha, ha!
        But those times are run out; and, for my sake,
        Zealous dissemblance has since far’d the worse.
        Let me see now, whose cloak shall I wear to-day to
        continue change?—O—Arthur!

                           _Re-enter_ ARTHUR.

          AR. Here, sir.
          FRI. Bring down Sir Oliver Needy’s taffeta cloak and
        beaver hat—I am sure he is fast enough in the Knight’s
        ward[473]—and Andrew Lucifer’s rapier and dagger with
        the embossed girdle and hangers[474] [_exit_ ARTHUR],
        for he’s in his third sweat by this time, sipping of
        the doctor’s bottle, or picking the ninth part of a
        rack of mutton dry-roasted, with a leash of nightcaps
        on his head like the pope’s triple crown, and as many
        pillows crushed to his back, with O-the-needles! for
        he got the pox of a sempster, and it pricked so much
        more naturally. Quick, Arthur, quick.

          _Re-enter_ ARTHUR, _with cloak, &c., which_ FRIPPERY
                               _puts on_.

        Now to the deceas’d knight’s daughter,
        Whom many gallants sue to, I ’mongst many;
        For
        Since impudence gains more respect than virtue,
        And coin than[475] blood, which few can now deny,
        Who’re your chief gallants then but such as I?
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                 _An Apartment in_ KATHERINE’S _House_.

                   _Enter_ KATHERINE _and_ FITSGRAVE.

          FIT. You do your beauties injury, sweet virgin,
        To lose the time they must rejoice in youth:
        There’s no perfection in a woman plac’d
        But wastes itself though it be never wasted;
        Then judge your wrongs[476] yourself.
          KAT. Good master Fitsgrave,
        Through sorrow for the knight my father’s death,
        (Whose being was the perfection[477] of my joy
        And crown of my desires), I cannot yet
        But forcedly on marriage fix my heart:
        Yet heaven forbid I should deject your hopes!
        Conceive not of me so uncharitably;
        I should belie my soul if I should say
        You are the man I never should affect.
        I understand you thus far, you’re a gentleman,
        Whom your estate and virtues may commend[478]
        To a far worthier breast than this of mine.
          FIT. O cease! I dare not hear such blasphemy.
        What is without you worthy I neglect;
        In you is plac’d the worth that I respect.
        Vouchsafe,[479] unequall’d virgin, [to] accept
        This worthless favour from your servant’s arm,
        The hallow’d beads, whereon I justly kept
        The true and perfect number of my sighs.
                                     [_Gives a chain of pearl._
          KAT. Mine cannot equal yours, yet in exchange
        Accept and wear it for my sake.       [_Gives a jewel._
          FIT. Even as my [life] I’ll rate it.

        _Enter_ GOLDSTONE, PURSENET, TAILBY, FRIPPERY, PRIMERO,
                   _and Boy_, _at the farther door_.

          GOL. Heart! Fitsgrave in such bosom single-loves?
          PUR. So close and private with her!
          TAI. Observe ’em; he grows proud and bold.
          FRI. Why, was not this a general meeting?
          PRI. By her own consent. Death, how I could taste his
        blood!
          KAT. See, the gentlemen,
        At my request, do all present themselves.
          GOL. Manifold blisses wait on her desire,
        Whose beauty and whose mind so many honour!
          KAT. I take your wishes thankfully, kind gentlemen,
        All here assembled, over whose long suits
        I ne’er insulted;
        Nor, like that common sickness of our sex,
        Grew proud in the abundance of my suitors,
        Or number of the days they sued unto me.
        Dutiful sorrow for my father’s death,
        Not wilful coyness, hath my hours detain’d
        So long in silence.
        I’m left to mine own choice: so much the more
        My care calls on me: if I err through love,
        ’Tis I must chide myself; I cannot shift
        The fault unto my parents, they’re at rest;
        And I shall sooner err through love than wealth.
          GOL. Good!
          PUR. Excellent!
          TAI. That likes[480] me well.
          PRI. Hope still.
          KAT. And my affections do pronounce you all
        Worthy their pure and most entire deserts:
        Yet they can choose but one;
        Nor do I dissuade any of his hopes,
        Because my heart is not yet throughly fix’d
        On marriage or the man,
        But crave the quiet respite of one month,
        The month unto this night; against which time
        I do invite you all to that election,
        Which, on my unstain’d faith and virgin promise,
        Shall light amongst no strangers, but yourselves.
        May this content you?
                 [_While she is speaking, the Boy steals from her
                              the chain of pearl._
          ALL. Glad and content!
          KAT. ’Tis a good time to leave:
        Till then commend us to your gentlest thoughts.
                                                       [_Exit._
          ALL. Enough.
          FIT. Ough!

            [_The gallants look scurvily upon_ FITSGRAVE, _and_
                _he upon them. Exeunt_ GOLDSTONE, TAILBY,
                FRIPPERY, _and_ PRIMERO. _As_ PURSENET _is going
                out, the Boy takes him into a corner_.
          BOY. Hist, master, hist!
          PUR. Boy, how now?
          BOY. Look you, sir.
          PUR. Her chain of pearl?
          BOY. I sneckt it away finely.
          PUR. Active boy,
        Thy master’s best revenue, his life and soul!
        Thou keep’st ’em both together: whip, away.
                                                   [_Exit Boy._
        Fall back, fall belly, I must be maintain’d:
        Hope is no purchase;[481]
        Nor care I if I miss her. Why I rank
        In this design with gallants, there’s full cause;
        Policy invites me to it:
        ’Tis not for love, or for her sake alone;
        It keeps my state suspectless and unknown.
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          FIT. Their looks run through and through me, and the
             stings
        Of their snake-hissing whispers pierc’d my hearing.
        They’re mad she grac’d me with one private minute
        Above their fortunes: I’ve[482] observed ’em often
        Most spitefully aspécted toward my happiness,
        Beyond all others; but the cause I know not.
        A quiet month the virgin has enclos’d
        Unto herself; suitors stand without till then:
        In which space cunningly I’ll wind myself
        Into their bosoms. I’ve bethought the shape;
        Some credulous scholar, easily infected
        With fashion, time, and humour: unto such
        Their deepest thoughts will, like to wanton fishes,
        Play above water, and be all parts seen:
        For since at me their envy pines, I’ll see
        Whether their lives from touch of blame sit free.
                                                       [_Exit._


                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                     _A Room in_ PRIMERO’S _House_.

              _Enter_ PRIMERO, _meeting_ MISTRESS NEWCUT.

          PRI. Mistress Newcut, welcome: here will be choice of
        gallants for you anon.
          MIS. N. Is all clear? may I venture? am I not seen of
        the wicked?
          PRI. Strange absurdity, that you should come into my
        house, and ask if you be not seen of the wicked!
        push![483] I take’t unkindly, i’faith: what think you of
        my house? ’tis no such common receptacle.
          MIS. N. Forgive me, sweet master Primero: I can be
        content to have my pleasure as much as another, but I
        must have a care of my credit; I would not be seen; any
        thing else. My husband’s at sea, and a woman shall have
        an ill report in this world, let her carry herself never
        so secretly; you know’t, master Primero. And what choice
        of gallants be they? will they be proper gentlemen,
        think you?
          PRI. Nay, sure they are as proper as they will be
        already.
          MIS. N. I must have choice, you know; I come for no
        gain, but for sheer pleasure and affection.
          PRI. You see your old spy-hole yonder; take your
        stand, please your own eye. I’ll work it so the
        gallants shall present themselves before you, and in
        the most conspicuous fashion.
          MIS. N. That’s all I can desire—till better come.
        [_Aside._]—Look you.
          PRI. What mean you, lady?
          MIS. N. A trifle, sir, to buy you silver spurs:
        Good sir, accept it.          [_Gives money, and exit._
          PRI. Silver spurs? a pretty emblem! mark it; all her
        gifts are about riding still: the other day she sent me
        boot-hose wrought in silk and gold; now silver spurs.
        Well, go thy ways, thou’rt as profitable a spirit as
        e’er lighted into my house. Come, ladies, come, ’tis
        late; to music,—when?[484]

                     _Enter Courtesans and Novice._

          FIRST C. You’re best command us, sir!—Our pimp’s grown
           proud.
          PRI. To fools and strangers these are gentlewomen
        Of sort and worship, knights’ heirs, great in portions,
        Boarded here for their music;
        And oftentimes ’tas been so cunningly carried,
        That I have had two stolen away at once,
        And married at Savoy,[485] and prov’d honest
           shopkeepers:
        And I may safely swear they practis’d music;
        They’re natural at prick-song. A small mist
        Will dazzle a fool’s eye, and that’s the world:
        So I can thump my hand upon the table
        With an austere grace, and cry one, two, and three,
        Fret, stamp, and curse, foh, ’twill pass well for me!

                              _Enter Boy._

        How now, sirrah?
          BOY. They’re coming in, sir, and strangers in their
        company.
          PRI. Tune apace, ladies.—Be ready for the song, sirrah.

        _Enter_ GOLDSTONE, PURSENET, FRIPPERY, TAILBY, FITSGRAVE
                       _disguised, and_ BUNGLER.

          GOL. Nay, I beseech you, gallants, be more inward[486]
        with this gentleman; his parts deserve it.
          PUR. Whence comes he, sir?
          GOL. Piping hot[487] from the university; he smells of
        buttered loaves yet; an excellent scholar, but the
        arrantest ass! For this our solicitor, he’s a rare
        fellow five-and-forty mile hence, believe that: his
        friends are of the old fashion, all in their graves; and
        now has he the leisure to follow all new fashions, ply
        the brothels, practise salutes and cringes.
          PUR. O!
          GOL. Now, dear acquaintance,
        I’ll bring you to see fashions.
          FIT. What house is this, sir?
          GOL. O, of great name: here music is profess’d;
        Here sometimes ladies practise, and the meanest,
        Daughters to men of worship,
        Whom gentlemen, such as ourselves, may visit,
        Court, clip,[488] and exercise our wits upon;
        It is a profess’d courtesy.

          FIT. A pretty recreation, i’faith!
          GOL. I seldom saw so few here: you shall have ’em
        sometimes in every corner of the house, with their
        viols[489] betwixt their legs, and play the sweetest
        strokes; ’twould e’en filch your soul almost out of your
        bosom.
          FIT. Pax[490] on’t, we spoil ourselves for want of these
        things at university.
          GOL. You have no such natural happiness: let’s draw
        near.
          PRI. Gentlemen, you are all most respectively[491]
        welcome.
          GOL. We are bold and insatiate suitors, sir, to the
        breath of your music, and the dear sight of those
        ladies.
          PRI. And what our poor skill can invite you to,
        You’re[492] kindly welcome: you must pardon ’em,
           gentlemen,
        Virgins and bashful, besides new beginners;
        ’Tis not a whole month since they were first enter’d.
          GOL. Seven year in my knowledge.            [_Aside._
          PRI. They blush at their very lessons; they’ll[493]
             not endure
        To hear of a stop, a prick, or a semiquaver.
          FIRST C. O, out upon you!
          PRI. La, I tell you;—you’ll bear me witness,
             gentlemen,
        If their complaints come to their parents’ ears,
        They’re words of art I teach ’em, nought but art.
          GOL. Why, ’tis most certain.
          BUN. For all scholars know that _musica est ars_.
          ALL THE C. O beastly word!
          PRI. Look to the ladies, gentlemen.
          GOL. Kiss again.
          PUR. Come, another.
          TAI. This [is] a good interim.          [_Exit._[494]
          PRI. What have you done, sir?
          BUN. Why, what have I done?
          PRI. Saw you their stomachs queasy,[495] and come with
        such gross meat?
          BUN. Why, is’t not Latin, sir?
          PRI. Latin? why, then, let the next to’t be Latin too.
          PUR. So, enough.
          GOL. Nay, I can assure you thus far, I that never knew
        the language have heard so much that _ars_ is Latin for
        art; and it may well be too, for there’s more art in’t
        now a-days than ever was.
          PRI. Is’t possible?
        I’m sorry then I’ve[496] followed it so far.
          FIRST C. A scholar call you him?
          PRI. Music must not jar:
        The offence is satisfied. Come, to the song;
        Begin, sir.
              [_The song: and he[497] keeps time, shews several
                  humours and moods: the Boy in his pocket nims
                  away Fitsgrave’s jewel here, and exit._
          BUN. Not a whole month since you were entered, ladies?
          FIT. None that shall see their cunning will believe
             it.                                      [_Aside._
          PRI. It is no affliction,[498] gentlemen.
          BUN. I care not much, i’faith, if I write down to my
        father presently to send up my sister in all haste, that
        I may place her here at this music-school.
          MIS. N. [_peeping in_] ’Slid, ’tis the fool my cousin! I
        would not for the value of three recreations he had seen
        me here.
          PRI. How like you your new prize?
          FRI. Pray, give me leave; I have not yet sufficiently
        admir’d her.
          PRI. My wits[499] must not stand idle. ’Slife, he’s in a
        sick trance!
          GOL. A cheat or two among these mistresses
        Would not be ill bestow’d; I affect none,
        But for my prey: such are their affections,
        I know it; how could drabs and cheaters live else?
        Then since the world rolls on dissimulation,
        I’ll be the first dissembler.                  [_Aside._
          FIRST C. Prithee, love, comfort, choice,
        My only wish, in thee I am confin’d!
        Deny me any thing, a slight chain of pearl?
          PUR. Nay, and it[500] be but slight——
          FIRST C. Being denied,
        I prize it slight; but given me by my love,
        Light shall not be so dear unto my eye,
        Mine eye unto the body, as the gift.
          PUR. How have I power to deny this to you,
        That command all? my fortunes are thy servants,
        And thou the mistress both of them and me.
                                        [_Gives her the chain._
          FIRST C. The truest that e’er breath’d!
          GOL. To a gentleman
        That thus so long and so[501] sincerely lov’d you
        As I myself, ne’er was less pity shewn.
          SEC. C. Why, I never was held cruel.
          GOL. But to me.
          SEC. C. Nor to you.
          GOL. Go to, ’t’as scar’d you much.
          SEC. C. I’m sorry your conceit is so unkind
        To think me so.
          GOL. When had I other argument?
        I’ve often tender’d you my love and service,
        And that in no mean fashion;
        Yet were you never[502] that requiteful mistress
        That grac’d me with one favour;
        ’Slight, not so much as such a pretty ring;
        Pax[503] on’t, ’t’as almost broke my heart.
                                         [_Takes off her ring._
          SEC. C. Has took it off:—’Sfoot, master
             Goldstone![504]
          GOL. Nay, where a man loves most, there to be scanted!
          SEC. C. My ring, come, come——
          GOL. What reckon I a satin gown or two,
        If she were wise?
          SEC. C. Life! my ring, sir, come——
          GOL. Have you the face, i’faith?
          SEC. C. Give me my ring.
          GOL. Prithee, hence; by this light you get none on’t.
          SEC. C. How?
          GOL. I hold your favours of more pure esteem
        Than to part from ’em; faith, I do, howe’er
        You think of me.
          SEC. C. Push,[505] pray, sir——
          GOL. Hark you, go to;
        You’ve[506] lost much by unkindness; go your ways.
          SEC. C. ’Sfoot!
          GOL. But yet there’s no time past; you may redeem it.
          SEC. C. Come, I cannot miss[507] it, i’faith; beside,
        the gentleman that bestowed it on me swore to me it cost
        him twenty nobles.[508]
          GOL. Twenty nobles? pox of twenty nobles!
        But you must cost me more, you pretty villain:
        Ah, you little rogue!
          SEC. C. Come, come, I know you’re but in jest.
          GOL. In jest? no, you shall see.
          SEC. C. No way will get it:
        As good give it him now, and hope for somewhat.
                                                      [_Aside._
          GOL. True love made jest!
          SEC. C. I did but try thy faith,
        How fast thou’dst hold it. Now I see a woman
        May venture worthy favours to thy trust,
        And have ’em truly kept; and I protest,
        Had I drawn’t from thee, I should ne’er ha’ lov’d thee;
        I know that.
          GOL. ’Sfoot, I was ne’er so wrongèd in my life!
        Think you I’m[509] in jest with you? what, with my love?
        I could find lighter subjects you shall see;
        And time will shew how much you injure me.
          SEC. C. The ring, were it[510] thrice worth, I freely
             give,
        For I know you’ll[511] requite it.
          GOL. Will I live?
          SEC. C. Enough.
          GOL. Why, this was well come off now:
        Where’s my old serving-man? not yet return’d?
        O, here he peeps.                             [_Aside._

                             _Enter_ FULK.

                          Now, sirrah?
          FULK. May it please your worship—they’re done
        artificially, i’faith, boy.
          GOL. Both the great beakers?
          FULK. Both, lad.
          GOL. Just the same size?
          FULK. Ay, and the marks as just.
          GOL. So, fall off respectively[512] now.
          FULK. My lord desires your worship of all love——
          GOL. His lordship must hold me excused till morning;
        I’ll not break company to-night. Where sup we, gallants?
          PUR. At Mermaid.[513]
          GOL. Sup there who list, I forsworn the house.
          FULK. For the truth is, this plot must take effect at
        Mitre.[514]
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          PUR. Faith,[515] I’m indifferent.
          BUN. So are we, gentlemen.
          PUR. Name the place, master Goldstone.
          GOL. Why, the Mitre, in my mind, for neat attendance,
        diligent boys, and—push![516] excels it far.
          ALL. Agreed, the Mitre then.
          PUR. Boy[517]—some goodness toward:[518] the boy’s whipt
        away.                                         [_Aside._
          FIT. The jewel, heart, the jewel!
          GOL. How now, sir? what mov’d you?
          FIT. Nothing, sir;
        A spice of poetry, a kind a’ fury,
        A disease runs among scholars.
          GOL. Mass, it made you stamp.
          FIT. Whew,
        ’T’ill make some stamp and stare, make a strange noise,
        Curse, swear, beat tire-men,[519] and kick players’
           boys;
        The effects are very fearful.
          PUR. Bless me from’t!
          FIT. O, you need not fear it, sir.—Hell of this luck!
          GOL. Hark, he’s at it again!
          PUR. Some pageant-plot, or some device for the
             tilt-yard:
        Disturb him not.
          FIT. How can I gain her love,
        When I have lost her favour?                  [_Aside._
          GOL. What money hast about thee? Look you,[520] sir, I
        must be fain to pawn a fair stone here for ordinary
        expenses: a pox of my tenants! I give ’em twenty days
        after the quarter, and they cut out forty.
          FRI. Why, you might take the forfeiture of their leases
        then.
          GOL. I know I might; but what’s their course? The rogues
        come[521] me up all together, with geese and capons, and
        petitions in pigs’ snouts, which would move any man,
        i’faith, were his stomach ne’er so great; and to see how
        pitifully the pullen[522] will look, it makes me after
        relent, and turn my anger into a quick fire to roast
        ’em—nay, touch’t and spare it not.
          FRI. ’Tis right: well, what does your worship borrow of
        this, sir?
          GOL. The stone’s twenty nobles.[523]
          FRI. Nay, hardly.
          GOL. As I am a right gentleman.
          FRI. It comes near it indeed: well, here’s five pound in
        gold upon’t.
          GOL. ’Twill serve; and the ring safe and secret?
          FRI. As a virgin’s.
          GOL. I wish no higher.—What, gallants, are you
             constant?
        Does the place hold?
          ALL. The Mitre.
          GOL. Sir, in regard of our continued boldness and
        trouble, which love to your music hath made us guilty
        of, shall we entreat your worship’s company, with these
        sweet ladies, your professed scholars, to take part of a
        poor supper with myself and these gentlemen at the
        Mitre?
          FRI. Pray, master Primero——
          PUR. I beseech you, sir, let it be so.
          PRI. O, pardon me, sweet gentlemen; the world’s apt to
        censure. I have the charge of them, they’re left in
        trust, they’re virgins: and I dare not hazard their
        fames; the least touch mars ’em: and what would their
        right worshipful parents think, if the report should fly
        to them, that they were seen with gentlemen in a tavern?
          GOL. All this may be prevented: what serves your coach
             for?
        They may come coach’d and mask’d.
          PRI. You put me to’t, sir;
        Yet I must say again, I fear the drawers
        And vintner’s boys will be familiar with them,
        And think ’em mistresses.
          PUR. There are those places where respect seems
             slighter;
        More censure[524] is belonging to the Mitre;
        You know that, sir.
          PRI. Gentlemen, you prevail.
          GOL. We’ll all expect you there.
          PRI. And we’ll not fail.
          FRI. The devil will ne’er dissemble with them so,
        As you for them.
          GOL. Come, sir.
          FRI. What else? let’s go.
        [_Exeunt all except_ PRIMERO, _Courtesans, and Novice_.

                           _Re-enter_ TAILBY.

          PRI. How cheer you, sir?
          TAI. Faith, like the moon, more bright,
        Decreas’d in body, but re-made in light:
        Here thou shalt share some of my brightness with me.
          PRI. By my faith, they’re[525] comfortable beams, sir.
          FIRST C. Come,
        Where have you spent the time now from my sight?
        I’m jealous of thy action.
          TAI. Push![526] I did but walk
        A turn or two in the garden.
          FIRST C. What made you[527] there?
          TAI. Nothing but cropt a flower.
          FIRST C. Some woman’s honour, I believe.
          TAI. Foh! is this a woman’s honour?
          FIRST C. Much about one,
        When both are pluck’d, their sweetness is soon gone.
          TAI. Prithee, be true to me.
          FIRST C. When did I fail?
          TAI. Yet I am ever doubtful that you[528] sin.
          FIRST C. I do account the world but as my spoil,
        To adorn thee:
        My love is artificial to all others,
        But purity to thee. Dost thou want gold?
        Here, take this chain of pearl, supply thyself:
        Be thou but constant, firm, and just to me,
        Rich heirs shall want ere want come near to thee.
          _Tai._ Upon thy lip I seal sincerity.
                                       [_Exit First Courtesan._
          SEC. C. Was this your vow to me?
          TAI. Pox, what’s a kiss to be quite rid of her?
        She’s su’d so long, I was asham’d of her:
        ’Twas but her cheek I kiss’d neither, to save her
           longing.
          SEC. C. ’Tis not a kiss I weigh.
          TAI. Had you weigh’d this,
        ’T’ad lack’d above five ounces of a true one;
        No kiss that e’er weigh’d lighter.
          SEC. C. ’Tis thy love that I suspect.
          TAI. My love? why, by this—what shall I swear by?
          SEC. C. Swear by this jewel; keep thy oath, keep that.
          TAI. By this jewel, then, no creature can be perfect
        In my love but thy dear self.
          SEC. C. I rest [content].                    [_Exit._
          TAI. Ha, ha, ha! let’s laugh at ’em, sweet soul.
          NOV. Ay, they may laugh at me;
        I was a novice, and believ’d your oaths.
          TAI. Why, what do you think of me? make I no
             difference
        ’Tween[529] seven years’ prostitution and seven days?
        Why, you’re but in the wane of a maid yet.
        You wrong my health in thinking I love them:
        Do not I know their populous[530] imperfections?
        Why, they cannot live till Easter, let ’em shew
        The fairest side to th’ world, like hundreds more,
        Whose clothes
        E’en stand upright in silver, when their bodie[s]
        Are ready to drop through ’em: such there be;
        They may deceive the world, they ne’er shall me.
          NOV. Forgive my doubts;
        And for some satisfaction wear this ring,
        From which I vow’d ne’er but to thee to part.
          TAI. With which thou ever[531] bind’st me to thy
             heart.                             [_Exit Novice._
        [_singing_] _O, the parting of us twain
                Hath caus’d me mickle[532] pain!
                And I shall ne’er be married
                Until I see my muggle again._
          MIS. N. [_peeping in_] Hist!
          PRI. Ha?
          MIS. N. The nimble gentleman, in the celestial
        stockings——
          PRI. Has the best smock-fortune to be beloved of women.—
        Valle loo lo, lille lo lillo, valle loo lee lo lillo!
          TAI. Valle loo lo, lille [lo] lillo, valle loo lee lo
        lillo!
          MIS. N. Ah, sweet gentleman, he keeps it up stately!
                      [_Aside._
          PRI. Well held, i’faith, sir: mass, and now I remember
        too, I think you ne’er saw my little banqueting box
        above since I altered it.
          TAI. Why, have you altered that?
          PRI. O, divinely, sir! the pictures are all new run over
        again.
          TAI. Fie!

          PRI. For what had the painter done, think you? drew
        me Venus naked, which is the grace of a man’s room,
        you know; and, when he had done, drew a number of
        oaken leaves before her: had not lawn been a hundred
        times softer, made a better shew, and been more
        gentlewoman-like?
          TAI. More lady-like a great deal.
          PRI. Come, you shall see how ’tis altered now;
        I do not think but you’ll like her.          [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                        _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.[533]

          FIT. My pocket pick’d? this was no brothel-house!
        A music-school? damnation has fine shapes:
        I paid enough for the song, I’ve[534] lost a jewel
        To me more precious than their souls to them
        That gave consent to filch it. I’ll hunt hard,
        Waste time and money, trace and wheel about,
        But I will find these secret mischiefs out.

                            _Enter Servant._

        How now? what’s he?
        O, a servant to my love: being thus disguis’d,
        I’ll learn some news. [_Aside._]—Now, sir? you belong to
           me.[535]
          SER. I do, sir; but I cannot stay to say so: nay, good
        sir, detain me not; I am going in all haste to inquire
        or lay wait for a chain of pearl, nimmed out of her
        pocket the fifth of November, a dismal day.
          FIT. Ha! a chain of pearl, sayst thou?
          SER. A chain of pearl, sir, which one master Fitsgrave,
        a gentleman and a suitor, fastened upon her as a pledge
        of his love.
          FIT. Ha!
          SER. Urge me no more, I have no more to say;
        Your friend, Jeronimo Bedlam.                  [_Exit._
          FIT. Thou’rt a mad fellow indeed.
        Some comfort yet, that hers is missing too;
        I feel my soul at much more ease: both stoln![536]
        When griefs have partners they are better borne.
                                                       [_Exit._


                            SCENE III.[537]


                      _A Room in the Mitre._[538]

            _Where are discovered_ PRIMERO, _Courtesans_,
                  _Novice_, GOLDSTONE, PURSENET, FRIPPERY,
                  TAILBY, BUNGLER, FULK, ARTHUR, _Boy_, _and
                  Servant_.


          PRI. Where be your liveries?
          FIRST C. They attend without.
          PRI. Go, call the coach. [_Exit Servant._]—Gentlemen,
        you have excelled in kindness as we in boldness.
          TAI. So you think amiss, sir.
          GOL. Kind ladies, we commit you to sweet dreams,
        Ourselves unto the fortune of the dice.—
        Dice, ho!                             [_Exit_ PRIMERO.
          FIRST C. You rest firm mine?
          TAI. E’en all my soul to thee.
                                       [_Exit First Courtesan._
          SEC. C. You keep your vows?
          TAI. Why, do I breathe or see?
                                        [_Exit Sec. Courtesan._
          NOV. Is your love constant?
          TAI. Ay, to none but thee.            [_Exit Novice._
        Now gone, ay, now I love nor them nor thee;
        ’Slife, I should be cloy’d, should I love one in three.

                           _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.

          PUR. O, here’s master Bouser now.
          FIT. Save you, sweet gentlemen.
          TAI. Sweet master Bouser, welcome.
          PUR. When come these dice?
          [_Within._] Anon, anon, sir.
          PUR. Yet anon, anon, sir!
          GOL. Hast thou shewn art in ’em?
          FULK. You shall be judge, sir; here be the
        tavern-beakers, and here peep out the fine alchemy[539]
        knaves, looking like well, sir, most of our gallants,
        that seem what they are not.
          GOL. Peace, villain, am not I in presence?
          FULK. Why, that puts me in mind of the jest, sir.
          GOL. Again, you chatterer?[540]
          FULK. Nay, compare ’em, and spare ’em not.
          GOL. The bigness of the bore, just the same size; the
        marks, no difference. Away, put money in thy pocket, and
        offer to draw in upon the least occasion.
          FULK. I am no babe, sir.
          GOL. Hist!
          FULK. What’s the matter now?
          GOL. Give me a pair of false dice ere you go.
          FULK. Pax[541] on’t, you’re so troublesome too, you
        cannot remember a thing before! If I stay a little
        longer, I shall be staid anon.

                            _Enter Vintner._

          VIN. Here be dice for your worships.
          PUR. O, come, come!
          GOL. The vintner himself?
        I’ll shift away these beakers by a slight.[542]
                           [_Aside._
          VIN. Master Goldstone——
          GOL. How now, you conjuring rascal?
          VIN. Bless your good worship; you’re in humours,
        methinks.
          GOL. Humours? say that again.
          VIN. I said no such word, sir.—Would I had my beakers
        out on’s fingers!                             [_Aside._
          GOL. What’s thy name, vintner?
          VIN. Jack, and[543] please your worship.
          GOL. Turn knight, like thy companions, scoundrel, live
        upon usury, wear thy gilt spurs at thy girdle for fear
        of slubbering.
          VIN. O no, I hope I shall have more grace than so, sir!
        Pray, let me help your worship.
          GOL. Cannot I push ’em together without your help?
          VIN. O, I beseech your worship! they’re the two
        standards of my house.
          GOL. Standards? there lie your standards.
          VIN. Good your worship.—I am glad they are out of his
        fingers: my wife shall lock ’em up presently; they shall
        see no sun this twelvemonth’s day for this trick.
                                                        [_Aside._
          GOL. Let me come to the sight of your standards again.
          VIN. Your worship shall pardon me.—Now you shall not see
        ’em in haste, I warrant ye.                    [_Aside._
          GOL. I do not desire’t. Ha, ha!
                             [_Exit Vintner[544] with beakers._
          FIT. Why, master Goldstone!
          GOL. I am for you, gallants.—Master Bouser, cry you
        mercy, sir: why supped you from us?
          FIT. Faith, sir, I met with a couple of my fellow-pupils
        at university, and so we renewed our acquaintance and
        supped together.
          GOL. Fie, that’s none of the newest fashion, I must
        tell you that, master Bouser: you must never take
        acquaintance of any a’ th’ university when you are at
        London; nor any of London when you’re at university:
        you must be more forgetful, i’faith; every place
        ministers his acquaintance abundantly.
          BUN. He tells you true, sir.
          GOL. I warrant you here’s a gentleman will ne’er commit
        such an absurdity.
          BUN. Who, I? no: ’tis well known, if I be disposed, I’ll
        forget any man in a seven-night, and yet look him in the
        face: nay, let him ride but ten mile from me, and come
        home again, it shall be at my choice whether I’ll
        remember him or no: I have tried that.
          GOL. This is strange, sir.
          BUN. ’Tis as a man gives his mind to’t, sir: and now you
        bring me in, I remember ’twas once my fortune to be
        cozened of all my clothes, and with my clothes my money;
        a poor shepherd, pitying me, took me in and relieved me.
          GOL. ’Twas kindly done of him, i’faith.
          BUN. Nay, you shall see now: ’twas his fortune likewise,
        not long after, to come to me in much distress, i’faith,
        and with weeping eyes; and do you think I remembered
        him?
          GOL. You could not choose.
          BUN. By my troth, not I; I forgot him quite, and never
        remembered him to this hour.
          GOL. And yet knew who he was?
          BUN. As well as I know you, i’faith: ’tis a gift given
        to some above others.
          FIT.[545] To fools and knaves; they never miss on’t.
                 [_Aside._
          BUN. Does any make such a wonder at this? why, alas,
        ’tis nothing to forget others! what say you to those
        that forget themselves?
          GOL. Nay, then, to dice:—come, set me, gallants, set.
          FRI. Ay, fall to’t, gentlemen,
        I shall hear some news from some of you anon:
        I’ve[546] th’ art to know which lose, and ne’er look on.
        I’ll be ready with all the worst money I can find about
           me. [_Aside._]—Arthur!
          AR. Here, sir.
          FRI. Stand ready.
          AR. Fear not me, sir.
          GOL. These are mine, sir.
          FRI. Here’s a washed angel;[547]
        It shall away: here’s mistress rose-noble[548]
        Has lost her maidenhead, crack’d in the ring;[549]
        She’s good enough for gamesters, and to pass
        From man to man: for gold presents at dice
        Your harlot, in one hour won and lost thrice;
        Every man has a fling at her.
          TAI. Again? pax[550] of these dice!
          BUN. ’Tis ill to curse the dead, sir.
          TAI.[551] Mew, where should I wish the pox but among
             bones?
          FIT. He tells you right, sir.
          TAI. I ne’er have any luck at these odd hands:
        None here to make us six? why, master Frip!
          FRI. I am very well here, I thank you, sir: I had rather
        be telling my money myself than have others count it for
        me; ’tis the scurviest music in the world, methinks, to
        hear my money gingle in other men’s pockets; I never had
        any mind to’t, i’faith.
          TAI. ’Slud, play six or play four, I’ll play no more.
          GOL. ’Sfoot, you see there’s none here to draw in.

          FULK. Rather than you should be destitute, gentlemen,
        I’ll play my ten pound, if my master’s worship will give
        me leave.
          PUR. Come.
          TAI. He shall, he shall.
          GOL. Pray, excuse me, gentlemen.—’Sfoot, how now,
        goodman rascal? what! because you served my grandfather
        when he went ambassador, and got some ten pound by th’
        hand, has that put such spirit in you to offer to draw
        in among gentlemen of worship, knave?
          TAI. Pray, sir, let’s entreat so much for once.
          PUR. ’Tis a usual grace, i’faith, sir;
        You’ve many gentlemen will play with their men.
          BUN. Ay, and with their maids too, i’faith.
          PUR. Good sir, give him leave.
          GOL. Yes, come, and[552] you be weary on’t; I pray draw
        near, sir.
          FULK. Not so, sir.
          TAI. Come, fool, fear nothing; I warrant ’t ye has given
        thee leave: stand here by me.—Come now, set round,
        gentlemen, set.
          PUR. How the poor fellow shakes!—Throw lustily, man.
          FULK. At all, gentlemen!
          TAI. Well said, i’faith.
          PUR. They’re all thine.[553]
          TAI. By my troth, I am glad the fellow has such luck,
        ’twill encourage him well.
          FULK. At my master’s worship alone!
          GOL. Now, sir slave?
          FULK. At my master’s worship alone!
          GOL. So, saucy rascal!
          FULK. At my master’s worship alone!
          GOL. You’re a rogue, and will be ever one![554]
          FULK. By my troth, gentlemen, at all again for once!
          TAI. Take ’em to thee, boy, take ’em to thee; thou’rt
        worthy of ’em, i’faith.
          GOL. Gentlemen, faith I am angry with you: go and suborn
        my knave again[555] me here, to make him proud and
        peremptory!
          TAI. Troth, that’s but your conceit, sir; the fellow’s
        an honest fellow, and knows his duty, I dare swear for
        him.
          PUR. Heart, I am sick already!
          GOL. Whither goes master [Pursenet]?
          PUR. Play on; I’ll take my turn, sir.—Boy.
          BOY. Master?
          PUR. Hist![556] a supply;—carry’t closely, my little
        fooker,—how much?
          BOY. Three pound, sir.
          PUR. Good boy! take out another lesson.—How now,
        gentlemen?
          TAI. Devil’s in’t, did you e’er see such a hand?
          PUR. I set you these three angels.[557]
          BOY. My master may set high, for all his stakes are
        drawn out of other men’s pockets.              [_Aside._
          FULK. As I said, gentlemen.
          PUR. Deuce, ace!
          FULK. At all your right worshipful worships!
          PUR. &c.[558] Death and vengeance!
          GOL. Hell, darkness!
          TAI. Hold, sir.
          PUR. Master Goldstone——
          GOL. Hinder me not, sweet gentlemen.—You rascal, I
        banish thee the board.
          TAI. I’faith, but you shall not, sir.
          GOL. Touch a die, and[559] thou darest! come you in with
        your lousy ten pound, you slave, among gentlemen of
        worship, and win thirty at a hand?
          TAI. Why, will you kick again[560] luck, sir?
          BUN. As long as the poor fellow ventures the loss of his
        own money, who can be offended at his fortunes?
          FULK. I have a master here! many a gentleman would be
        glad to see his man come forward, aha.
          PUR. Pray, be persuaded, sir.
          GOL. ’Slife, here’s none cuts my throat in play but
             he;
        I have observ’d it, an unlucky slave ’tis.
          BUN. Methinks his luck’s good enough, sir.
          GOL. Upon condition, gentlemen, that I may ever bar him
        from the board hereafter, I am content to wink at him.
          PUR. Faith, use your own pleasure hereafter; has won our
        money now.—Come to th’ table, sir; your master’s friends
        with you.
          FULK. Pray, gentlemen——
          TAI. The fiend’s in’t, I think: I left a fair chain of
        pearl at my lodging too, like an ass, and ne’er
        remembered it; that would ha’ been a good pawn now.—
        Speak, what do you lend upon these, master Frip?
        [_Offering his weapons, with girdle and hangers_] I care
        not much if you take my beaver hat too, for I perceive
        ’tis dark enough already, and it does but trouble me
        here.
          FRI. Very well, sir; why, now I can lend you three
        pound, sir.
          TAI. Prithee, do’t quickly then.
          FRI. There ’tis, in six angels.[561]

          TAI. Very compendiously.
          FRI. Here, Arthur, run away with these presently; I’ll
        enter ’em into th’ shop-book to-morrow. [_Exit_ ARTHUR
        _with weapons, &c._] [_Writing_] _Item, one gilt
        hatcht[562] rapier and dagger, with a fair embroidered
        girdle and hangers,[563] with which came also a beaver
        hat with a correspondent band._
          TAI. Push![564] i’faith, sir, you’re to blame; you have
        snibbed[565] the poor fellow too much; he can scarce
        speak, he cleaves his words with sobbing.
          FULK. Haff,[566] haff, haff, haff at all, gentlemen.
          GOL. Ah, rogue, I’ll make you know yourself!
          FULK. At the fairest!
          PUR. Out, i’faith! two aces.
          GOL. I am glad of that; come, pay me all these, goodman
        cloak-bag.
          PUR. Why, are you the fairest, sir?
          GOL. You need not doubt of that, sir.—Five angels, you
        scoundrel!
          TAI. Fie[567] a’ these dice! not one hand to-night!—
        There they go, gentlemen, at all, i’faith!
          PUR. Pay all with two treys and a quater.
          TAI. All curses follow ’em! pay yourselves withal.—I’ll
        pawn myself to’t, but I’ll see a hand to-night: not once
        hold in!—Here, master Frip, lend me your hand, quick,
        quick; so.
                                     [_Taking off his doublet._
          FRI. What do you borrow of this doublet now?
          TAI. Ne’er saw the world three days.
          FRI. Go to; in regard you’re a continual customer I’ll
        use you well, and pleasure you with five angels[568]
        upon’t.
          TAI. Let me not stand too long i’ th’ cold for them.
          BUN. Had ever country gentleman such fortune? All swoopt
        away! I’d need repair to th’ broker’s.
          TAI. If you be in that mind, sir, there sits a gentleman
        will furnish you upon any pawn as well as the publickst
        broker of ’em all.
          BUN. Say you so, sir? there’s comfort in that, i’faith.
          FRI. [_Writing_] _Item, upon his orange-tawny satin
        doublet five angels._
          BUN. But, by your leave, sir, next come[569] the
        breeches.
          FRI. O, I have tongue fit for any thing.
          BUN. Saving your tale, sir; ’tis given me to understand
        that you are a gentleman i’ th’ hundred, and deal in the
        premises aforesaid.
          FRI. Master Bungler, master Bungler, you’re mightily
        mistook: I am content to do a gentleman a pleasure for
        once, so his pawn be neat and sufficient.
          BUN. Why, what say you to my grandfather’s seal-ring
        here?
          FRI. Ay, marry, sir, this is somewhat like.
          BUN. Nay, view it well; an ancient arms, I can tell you.
          FRI. What’s this, sir?
          BUN. The great cod-piece, with nothing in’t.
          FRI. How!
          BUN. The word[570] about it, _Parturiunt montes_.
          FRI. What’s that, I pray, sir?
          BUN. _You promise to mount us._
          FRI. And belike he was not so good as his word?
          BUN. So it should seem by the story, for so our names
        came to be Bunglers.
          FRI. A lamentable hearing, that so great a house should
        shrink and fall to ruin!
          PUR. Two quaters, and yet lose it? heart!—Boy!—i’faith,
        what is’t?
          BOY. Five pound, sir.
          PUR. By my troth, this boy goes forward well; ye shall
        see him come to his preferment i’ th’ end!
          GOL. Why, how now? who’s that, gentlemen? a bargeman?
          TAI. I never have any luck, gallants, till my
        doublet’s off; Pm not half nimble enough. At this old
        cinque-quater drivel-beard!
          GOL.[571] Your worship must pay me all these, sir.
          TAI. There, and feast the devil with ’em!
          PUR. Hell gnaw these dice!
          GOL. What, do you give over, gallants?
          FIT.[572] Is’t not time?
          TAI. I protest I have but one angel left to guide me
        home to my lodging.
          GOL. How much, thinkest?
          FULK. Some fourscore angels, sir.
          GOL. Peace, we’ll join powers anon, and see how strong
        we are in the whole number. Mass, yon gilt goblet stands
        so full in mine eye, the whorson tempts me; it comes
        like cheese after a great feast, to disgest[573] the
        rest: he will hardly ’scape me, i’faith, I see that by
        him already: back for a parting blow now.—Boy!

                          _Re-enter Vintner._

          VIN. Anon, anon, sir.
          GOL. Fetch a pennyworth of soft wax to seal letters.
          VIN. I will, sir.                            [_Exit._
          TAI. Nay, had not I strange casting? thrice together two
        quaters and a deuce!
          PUR. Why, was not I as often haunted with two treys and
        a quater?

                          _Re-enter Vintner._

          VIN. There’s wax for your worship.—Anon, anon, sir.
                   [_Exit._
          GOL. Screen me a little, you whorson old
        cross-biter.[574]
          FULK. Why, what’s the business? filch it on hob goblet!
          PUR. And what has master Bouser lost?
          FIT. Faith, not very deeply, sir; enough for a scholar,
        some half a score royals.
          PUR. ’Sfoot, I have lost as many with spurs[575] at
        their heels.

                  _Re-enter Vintner with two Drawers._
          GOL. Come, gallants, shall we stumble?
          TAI. What’s a’ clock?
          FIRST D. Here’s none on’t, Dick; the goblet’s carried
        down.
          GOL. Nay, ’tis upon the point of three, boy.
          SEC. D. What’s[576] to be done, sirs?
          VIN. All’s paid, and your worships are welcome; only
        there’s a goblet missing, gentlemen, and cannot be found
        about house.
          GOL. How, a goblet?
          PUR. What manner a’ one?
          VIN. A gilt goblet, sir, of an indifferent size.
          GOL. ’Sfoot, I saw such a one lately.
          VIN. It cannot be found now, sir.
          GOL. Came there no strangers here?
          VIN. No, sir.
          GOL. This [is] a marvellous matter, that a goblet should
        be gone, and none but we in the room; the loss is near
        all,[577] here as we are; keep the door, vintner.
          VIN. No, I beseech your worship.
          GOL. By my troth, vintner, we’ll have a privy search for
        this. What! we are not all one woman’s children.
          VIN. I beseech ye, gentlemen, have not that conceit of
        me, that I suspect your worships.
          GOL. Tut, you are an ass; do you know every man’s
        nature? there’s a broker i’ th’ company.
          PUR. ’Slife, you have not stole the goblet, boy, have
        you?
          BOY. Not I, sir.
          PUR. I was afraid.—’Tis a good cause, i’faith, let each
        man search his fellow: we’ll begin with you.
          TAI. I shall save somebody a labour, gentlemen, for I’m
        half searched already.
          PUR. I thought the goblet had hung here, i’faith; none
        here, nor here.
          GOL. Seek about floor.—What was the goblet worth,
        vintner?
          VIN. Three pound ten shillings, sir; no more.
          GOL. Pox on’t, gentlemen, ’tis but angels[578] a-piece:
        it shall be a brace of mine, rather than I would have
        our reputations breathed upon by all comers; for you
        must think they’ll talk on’t in all companies—such a
        night, in such a company, such a goblet: ’sfoot, it may
        grow to a gangrene in our credits, and be incurable.
          TAI. Faith, I am content.
          FRI. So am I.
          PUR. There’s my angel too.
          GOL. So, and mine.—I’ll tell thee what, the missing of
        this goblet has dismayed the gentlemen much.
          VIN. I am sorry for that, sir.
          GOL. Yet they send thee this comfort by me; if they see
        thee but rest satisfied, and depart away contented,
        which will appear in thy countenance, not three times
        thrice the worth of the goblet shall hang between them
        and thee, both in their continual custom and all their
        acquaintances’.
          VIN. I thank their worships all; I am satisfied.
          GOL. Say it again.—Do you hear, gentlemen?
          VIN. I thank your worships all; I am satisfied.
                                 [_Exeunt Vintner and Drawers._
          GOL. Why, la, was not this better than hazarding our
        reputations upon trifles, and in such public as a
        tavern, such a questionable place?
          TAI. True.
          PUR. Faith,[579] it was well thought on.
          GOL. Nay, keep your way, gentlemen: I have sworn, master
        Bouser, I will be last, i’faith. [_Exeunt all except_
        GOLDSTONE _and_ FULK.]—Rascal, the goblet!
          FULK. Where, sir?
          GOL. Peep yon,[580] sir, under.
          FULK. Here, sir.[581]                       [_Exeunt._


                         ACT III.[582] SCENE I.


                    _A Room in_ TAILBY’S _Lodging_.

                   _Enter_ TAILBY _reading a letter_.

          TAI. [_reads_] _My husband is rode from home: make no
        delay; I know, if your will be as free as your horse,
        you will see me yet ere dinner. From Kingston, this
        eleventh of November._—Hah! these women are such
        creatures, such importunate, sweet souls, they’ll scarce
        give a man leave to be ready;[583] that’s their only
        fault, i’faith: if they be once set upon a thing, why,
        there’s no removing of ’em, till their pretty wills be
        fulfilled. O, pity thy poor oppressed client here, sweet
        Cupid, that has scarce six hours’ vacation in a month,
        his causes hang in so many courts! yet never suffer my
        French adversary, nor his big swoln confederates, to
        overthrow me,
        Who without mercy would my blood carouse,
        And lay me in prison in a doctor’s house.
        Thy clemency, great Cupid!—Peace, who comes here?

                           _Enter_ PURSENET.

          PUR. Sir gallant, well encountered.
          TAI. I both salute and take my leave together.
          PUR. Why, whither so fast, sir?
          TAI. Excuse me, pray; I’m in a little haste;
        My horse waits for me.
          PUR. What, some journey toward?[584]
          TAI. A light one, i’faith, sir.
          PUR. I’m[585] sorry that my business so commands me,
        I cannot ride with you; but I make no question
        You have company enough.
          TAI. Alas, not any!—nor do I desire it.—[_Aside._
        Why, ’tis but to Kingston yonder.
          PUR. O, cry you mercy, sir.
          TAI. ’Scape but one reach, there’s little danger
             thither.
          PUR. True, a little of Combe Park.[586]
          TAI. You’ve nam’d the place, sir; that’s all I fear,
             i’faith.
          PUR. Farewell, sweet master Tailby.       [_Exit_ TAIL.
        This fell out happily;
        I’ll call this purchase[587] mine before I greet him;
        E’en where his fear lies most, there will I meet him.


                             SCENE II.[588]


                             _Combe Park._

        _Enter_ PURSENET _with a scarf over his face, and Boy_.

          PUR. Boy.
          BOY. Sir?
          PUR. Walk my horse behind yon thicket; give a word if
        you descry.
          BOY. I have all perfect, sir.                 [_Exit._
          PUR. So; he cannot now be long. What with my boy’s
        dexterity at ordinaries, and my gelding’s celerity over
        hedge and ditch, but we make pretty shift to rub out a
        gallant; for I have learnt these principles:
        Stoop thou to th’ world, ’twill on thy bosom tread;
        It stoops to thee, if thou advance thy head.
        The mind being far more excellent than fate,
        ’Tis fit our mind then be above our state.
        Why should I write my extremities in my brow,
        To make them loathe me that respect me now?
        If every man were in his courses known,
        Legs that now honour him might spurn him down.
        To conclude, nothing seems as it is but honesty, and
        that makes it so little regarded amongst us.
          BOY [_within_]. Ela, ha, ho!
          PUR. The boy?
        He’s hard at hand; I’ll cross him suddenly:
        And here he comes.—

                            _Enter_ TAILBY.

                                              Stand!
          TAI. Ha!
          PUR. Deliver your purse, sir.
          TAI. I feared none but this place, i’faith; nay, when my
        mind gives me a thing once——
          PUR. Quick, quick, sir, quick; I must despatch three
        robberies yet ere night.
          TAI. I’m glad you have such good doings, by my troth,
        sir.
          PUR. You’ll fare ne’er[589] a whit the better for your
             flattery,
        I warrant you, sir.

          TAI. I speak sincerely; ’tis pity such a proper-parted
        gentleman should want; nor shall you, as long as I
        have’t about me. [PURSENET _rifles his pockets_.] Nay,
        search and spare not: there’s a purse in my left pocket,
        as I take it, with fifteen pound in gold in’t, and
        there’s a fair chain of pearl in the other: nay, I’ll
        deal truly with you; it grieves me, i’faith, when I see
        such goodly men in distress; I’ll rather want it myself
        than they should go without it.
          PUR. And that shews a good nature, sir.
          TAI. Nay, though I say it, I have been always accounted
        a man of a good nature; I might have hanged myself ere
        this time else. Pray, use me like a gentleman; take all,
        but injury[590] not my body.
          PUR. You must pardon me, sir;
        I must a little play the usurer,
        And bind you, for mine own security.
          TAI. Alas, there’s no conscience in that, sir! shall I
        enter into bond and pay money too?
          PUR. Tut, I must not be betrayed.
          TAI. Hear me but what I say, sir; I do protest I would
        not be he that should betray a man, to be prince of the
        world.
          PUR. Mass, that’s the devil,—I thank you heartily,—
        For he’s call’d prince a’ th’ world.
          TAI. You take me still at worst.
          PUR. Swear on this sword, then,
        To set spurs to your horse, not to look back,
        To give no marks to any passenger.
          TAI. Marks?[591] why, I think you have left me ne’er a
        penny, sir.

          PUR. I mean, no marks of any.[592]
          TAI. I understand you, sir.
          PUR. Swear then.
          TAI. I’faith, I do, sir.
          PUR. Away!
          TAI. I’m gone, sir.—By my troth, of a fierce thief he
        seems to be a very honest gentleman.
                                                       [_Exit._
          PUR. Why, this was well adventur’d, trim a gallant!
        Now, with a covetous[593] and long-thirsting eye,
        Let me behold my purchase,[594]
        And try the soundness of my bones with laughter.
        How? is not this the chain of pearl I gave
        To that perjurèd harlot? ’tis, ’sfoot, ’tis,
        The very chain!—O damnèd mistress!—Ha!
        And this the purse which, not five days before,
        I sent her fill’d with fair spur-royals?[595] Heart,
        The very gold! ’Slife, is this no robbery?
        How many oaths flew toward heaven,
        Which ne’er came half-way thither, but, like
           fire-drakes,[596]
        Mounted a little, gave a crack, and fell:
        Feign’d oaths bound up to sink more deep to hell.
        What folded paper’s this? death, ’tis her hand!

        [_reads_] _Master Tailby, you know with what affection I
        love you._ You do? _I count the world but as my prey to
        maintain you._ The more dissembling quean you, I must
        tell you. _I have sent you an embroidered purse here
        with fifty fair spur-royals in’t._ A pox on you for your
        labour, wench! _And I desire you of all loves to keep
        that chain of pearl from master Pursenet’s sight._ He
        cannot, strumpet; I behold it now, unto thy[597] secret
        torture. _So fare thee well, but be constant and want
        nothing_—as long as I ha’t, i’faith! methinks it should
        have gone so. Well, what a horrible age do we live in,
        that a man cannot have a quean to himself! let him but
        turn his back, the best of her is chipt away like a
        court loaf, that when a man comes himself, has nothing
        but bumbast; and these are two simple chippings here.
        Does my boy pick and I steal to enrich myself, to keep
        her, to maintain him? why, this is right the sequence of
        the world. A lord maintains her, she maintains a knight,
        he maintains a whore, she maintains a captain. So in
        like manner the pocket keeps my boy, he keeps me, I keep
        her, she keeps him; it runs like quicksilver from one to
        another. ’Sfoot, I perceive I have been the chief
        upholder of this gallant all this while: it appears
        true, we that pay dearest for our pasture[598] are ever
        likely worse used. ’Sfoot, he has a nag can run for
        nothing, has his choice, nay, and gets by the running of
        her.[599] O fine world, strange devils, and pretty
        damnable affections!

        BOY [_within_]. Lela, ha, ho!
          PUR. There, boy, again; what news there?

                            _Re-enter Boy._

          BOY. Master, hist,[600] master!
          PUR. How now, boy?
          BOY. I have descried a prize.
          PUR. Another, lad?
          BOY. The gull, the scholar.
          PUR. Master Bouser?
          BOY. Ay; comes along this way.
          PUR. Without company?
          BOY. As sure as he is your own.
          PUR. Back to thy place, boy.              [_Exit Boy._
        I have the luck to-day to rob in safety;
        Two precious cowards! Whist; I hear him.—
                        _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.
                                                    Stand!
          FIT. You lie; I came forth to go.
          PUR. Deliver your purse.
          FIT. ’Tis better in my pocket.
          PUR. How now? at disputations, signior fool?
          FIT. I’ve so much logic to confute a knave,
        A thief, a rogue!
                        [_Attacks and strikes_ PURSENET _down_.
          PUR. Hold, hold, sir, and[601] you be a gentleman, hold!
        let me rise.
          FIT. Heart!
        ’Tis the courtesy of his scarf unmask’d him to me
        Above the lip by chance: I’ll counterfeit.     [_Aside._

        Light! because I am a scholar, you think belike that
        scholars have no metal in ’em, but you shall find,—I
        have not done with you, cousin.
          PUR. As you’re a gentleman!
          FIT. As you’re a rogue!
          PUR. Keep on upon your way, sir.
          FIT. You bade me stand——
          PUR. I have been once down for that.
          FIT. And then deliver.
          PUR. Deliver me from you, sir!—O, pax[602] on’t, has
        wounded me!—Ela, ha, ho! my horse, my horse, boy!
                                            [_Exit._
          FIT. Have you your boy so ready? O thou world,
        How art thou muffled in deceitful forms!
        There’s such a mist of these, and still hath been,
        The brightness of true gentry is scarce seen.
        This journey was most happily assign’d;
        I’ve[603] found him dross both in his means and mind.
        What paper’s this he dropt? I’ll look on’t as I go.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                           _Near Combe Park._

                      _Enter_ PURSENET _and Boy_.

          PUR. A gull call you him? let me always set upon wise
        men; they’ll be afraid of their lives; they have a
        feeling of their iniquities, and know[604] what ’tis to
        die with fighting: ’sfoot, this gull lays on without
        fear or wit. How deep’s it, sayst thou, boy?
          BOY. By my faith, three inches, sir.
          PUR. La, this was long of you, you rogue!
          BOY. Of me, sir?
          PUR. Forgive me, dear boy; my wound ached, and I grew
        angry: there’s hope of life, boy, is there not?
          BOY. Pooh, my life for yours!
          PUR. A comfortable boy in man’s extremes! I was ne’er
        so afraid in my life but the fool would have seen my
        face: he had me at such advantage, he might have
        commanded my scarf. I ’scaped well there; ’t’ad choked
        me; my reputation had been past recovery: yet live I
        unsuspected, and still fit for gallants’ choice
        societies. But here I vow, if e’er I see this Bouser
        when he cannot see me, either in by-lane, privilege[d]
        place, court, alley, or come behind him when he’s
        standing,[605]
        Or take him when he reels from a tavern late,
        Pissing again[606] a conduit, wall, or gate;
        When he’s in such a plight, and clear from me[n],
        I’ll do that I’m[607] asham’d to speak till then.
                          [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                              _A Street._

                _Enter_ FITSGRAVE[608] _and Gentleman_.

          FIT. Nay, read forward: I have found three of
        your gallants, like your bewitching shame,[609]
        merely sophistical: there’s your bawd-gallant,
        your pocket-gallant, and your whore-gallant.
          GEN. [_reads_] _Master Tailby._
          FIT. That’s he.
          GEN. [_reads_] _I count the world but as my prey to
        maintain you._
          FIT. That’s just the phrase and style of ’em all to him;
        they meet altogether in one effect, and it may well hold
        too, for they all jump upon one cause, _subaudi_
        lechery.
          GEN. What shapes can flattery take! Let me entreat
             you,
        Both in the virgin’s right and our good hopes,
        Since your hours are so fortunate, to proceed.
          FIT. Why, he’s base that faints[610] until he crown his
           deed.
                                                       [_Exit._


                                SCENE V.


                     _A Room in_ PRIMERO’S _House_.

           _Enter_ PURSENET (_his arm in a scarf_) _and Boy,
                       meeting First Courtesan_.

          PUR. See that dissembling devil, that perjur’d
           strumpet!                                   [_Aside._
          FIRST C. Welcome, my soul’s best wish. O, out, alas!
        Thy arm bound in a scarf? I shall swoon instantly.
          PUR. Heart, and I’ll fetch you again in the same tune.
                                                      [_Aside._

        O my unmatch’d love, if any spark of life remain,
        Look up, my comfort, my delight, my——
          FIRST C. O good, O good!
          PUR. The organ of her voice is tun’d again;
        There’s hope in women when their speech returns;
        See, like the moon after a black eclipse,
        She by degrees recovers her pure light.
        How cheers my love?
          FIRST C. As one new-wak’d out of a deadly trance,
        The fit scarce quiet.
          PUR. ’Twas terrible for the time;
        I’d much ado to fetch you.
          FIRST C. ’Shrew your fingers!                [_Aside._
        How came my comfort wounded? speak.
          PUR. Faith, in a fray last night.
          FIRST C. In a fray? will you lose your blood so
             vainly?
        Many a poor creature lacks it. Tell me how?
        What was the quarrel?
          PUR. Loath to tell you that.
          FIRST C. Loath to tell me?
          PUR. Yet ’twas my cause of coming.
          FIRST C. Why, then, must not I know it?
          PUR. Since you urge it, you shall,
        You’re a strumpet!
          FIRST C. O, news abroad, sir!
          PUR. Say you so?
          FIRST C. Why, you knew that the first night you lay
             with me.
          PUR. Nay, not to me only, but to the world.
          FIRST C. Speak within compass, man.
          PUR. Faith, you know none, you sail without.
          FIRST C. I have the better skill then.
          PUR. At my first step into a tavern-room, to spy
        That chain of pearl wound on a stranger’s arm
        You begg’d of me!
          FIRST C. How? you mistook it sure.
          PUR. By heaven, the very self-same chain!
          FIRST C. O, cry you mercy, ’tis true, I’d forgot it:
        ’tis St. George’s day to-morrow: I lent it to my cousin
        only to grace his arm before his mistress.
          PUR. Notable cunning!
          FIRST C. And is this all now, i’faith?
          PUR. Not; I durst go further.
          FIRST C. Why, let me never possess your love if you see
        not that again a’ Thursday morning: I take’t unkindly,
        i’faith, you should fall out with me for such a trifle.
          PUR. Better and better!
          FIRST C. Come, a kiss, and friends!
          PUR. Away!
          FIRST C. By this hand, I’ll spoil your arm and[611] you
        will not.

          PUR. More for this than the devil——

          _Enter_ GOLDSTONE, TAILBY, FITSGRAVE, BUNGLER, _and
                              Courtesans_.

          GOL. Yea, at your book so hard?[612]
          PUR. Against my will.—Are you there, signior Logic?
        A pox of you, sir!                             [_Aside._
          GOL. Why, how now? what has fate sent us here, in the
        name of Venus, goddess of Cyprus?
          PUR. A freebooter’s pink, sir, three or four inches
        deep.
          GOL. No more? that’s conscionable, i’faith.
          TAI. Troth, I’m sorry for’t: pray, how came it, sir?
          PUR. Faith, by a paltry fray, in Coleman Street.
          FIT. Combe Park he would say.                [_Aside._
          PUR. No less than three at once, sir,
        Made a triangle with their swords and daggers,
        And all opposing me.
          FIT. And amongst those three only one hurt you, sir?
          PUR. Ex for ex.[613]
          TAI. Troth, and I’ll tell you what luck I had too, since
        I parted from you last.
          PUR. What, I pray?
          TAI. The day you offered to ride with me, I wish now I’d
        had your company: ’sfoot, I was set upon in Combe Park
        by three too.
          PUR. Bah!
          TAI. Robbed, by this light, of as much gold and jewels
        as I valued at forty pound.
          PUR. Sure Saturn is in the fifth house.
          TAI. I know not that; he may be in the sixth and[614]
        he will for me: I am sure they were in my pocket
        wheresoever they are;[615] but I’ll ne’er refuse a
        gentleman’s company again when ’tis offered me, I
        warrant you.
          GOL. I must remember you ’tis Mitre-night,[616] ladies.
          SEC. C. Mass, ’tis indeed Friday to-day, I’d quite
        forgot: when a woman’s busy, how the time runs away!
          FIRST C. O, you’ve betrayed us both!
          TAI. I understand you not.
          FIRST C. You’ve let him see the chain of pearl I gave
             you.
          TAI. Who? him? will you believe me, by this hand,
        He never saw it.
          FIRST C. Upon a stranger’s arm he swore to me.
          TAI. Mass, that may be; for the truth is, i’faith,
        I was robb’d on’t at Combe Park.
          FIRST. C. ’Twas that betrayed it.
          TAI. I would [I] had stay’d him;
        He was no stranger, he was a thief, i’faith,
        For thieves will be no strangers.
          FIRST C. How shall I excuse it?
          BUN. Nay, I have you fast enough, boy; you rogue!
        [_Seizing the Boy, who had attempted to pick his pocket._
          BOY. Good sir, I beseech you, sir, let me go!
                                            [_Struggling._[617]
          BUN. A pickpocket? nay, you shall to Newgate, look you.—
        Is this your boy, sir?
          PUR. How now, boy? a monster? thy arm lined[618] fast
        in another’s pocket? where learnt you that manners?
        what company have you kept a’ late, that you are so
        transformed into a rogue? that shape I know not.—
        Believe me, sir, I much wonder at the alteration of
        this boy, where he should get this nature: as good a
        child to see to, and as virtuous; he has his creed by
        heart, reads me his chapter duly every night; he will
        not miss you one tittle in the nine commandments.
          BUN. There’s ten of ’em.
          PUR. I fear he skips o’er one, Thou shall not steal.
          BUN. Mass, like enough.
          PUR. Else grace and memory would quite abash the boy.—
        Thou graceless imp! ah, thou prodigious child,
        Begot at some eclipse, degenerate rogue,
        Shame to thy friends, and to thy master eke!
        How far digressing from the noble mind
        Of thy brave ancestors, that lie in marble
        With their coat-armours o’er ’em!
          BUN. Had he such friends?
          PUR. The boy is well descended, though he be a rogue,
        and has no feeling on’t; yet for my sake, and for my
        reputation’s, seek not the blood of the boy; he’s near
        allied to many men of worship now yet living; a fine old
        man to his father; it would kill his heart, i’faith;
        he’d away like a chrisom.[619]
          BUN. Alas, good gentleman!
          PUR. Ah, shameless villain, complain’st thou? dost
             thou want?
          BOY. No, no, no, no!
          PUR. Art not well clad? thy hunger well resisted?
          BOY. Yes, yes, yes, yes!
          PUR. But thou shalt straight to Bridewell——
          BOY. Sweet master!
          PUR. Live upon bread and water and chap-choke.
          BOY. I beseech your worship!
          BUN. Come, I’ll be his surety for once.
          PUR. You shall excuse me indeed, sir.
          BUN. He will mend; ’a may prove an honest man for all
        this. I know gallant gentlemen now that have done as
        much as this comes to in their youth.
          PUR. Say you so, sir?
          BUN. And as for Bridewell, that will but make him worse;
        ’a will learn more knavery there in one week than will
        furnish him and his heirs for a hundred year.
          PUR. Deliver the boy!
          BUN. Nay, I tell you true, sir; there’s none goes in
        there a quean, but she comes out an arrant whore, I
        warrant you.
          PUR. The boy comes not there for a million!
          BUN. No, you had better forgive him by ten parts.
          PUR. True; but ’a must not know it comes from me.—
        Down a’ your knees, you rogue,
        And thank this gentleman has got your pardon.
          BOY. O, I thank your worship!
          PUR. A pox on you for a rogue;
        You put me to my set speech once a quarter.
                                               [_Aside to him._
          GOL. Nay, gentlemen, you quite forget your hour;
        Lead, master Bouser.
            [_Exeunt all but_ GOLDSTONE _and Second Courtesan_.
          SEC. C. Let me go: you’re a dissembler.
          GOL. How?
          SEC. C. Did not you promise me a new gown?
          GOL. Did I not? yes, faith, did I, and thou shalt have
        it.—Go, sirrah, [_calling to one off the stage_] run for
        a tailor presently. Let me see for the colour now:
        orange-tawney, peach colour—what sayst to a watchet[620]
        satin?

                            _Enter Tailor._

          SEC. C. O, ’tis the only colour I affect!
          TAI. A very orient colour, an’t please your worships. I
        made a gown on’t for a gentlewoman t’other day, and it
        does passing well upon her.
          GOL. A watchet satin gown——
          TAI. There your worship left, sir.
          GOL. Laid about, tailor——
          TAI. Very good, sir.
          GOL. With four fair laces.
          TAI. That will be costly, sir.
          GOL. How, you rogue, costly? out a’ th’ house, you
        slipshod, sham-legged, brown-thread-penny-skeined
        rascal!
          SEC. C. Nay, my sweet love——          [_Exit Tailor._
          GOL. Hang him, rogue! he’s but a botcher neither: come,
        I’ll send thee a fellow worth a hundred of this, if the
        slave were clean enough.                     [_Exeunt._


                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


                      _Before_ TAILBY’S _Lodging_.

         _Enter a Servant[621] bringing in a suit of satin, who
           knocks at_ TAILBY’S _door, from which enter_ JACK.

          JACK. Who knocks?
          SER. A Christian: pray, is not this master Tailby’s
        lodging? I was directed hither.
          JACK. Yes, this is my master’s lodging.
          SER. Cry you mercy, sir: is he yet stirring?
          JACK. He’s awake, but not yet stirring, for he played
        away half his clothes last night.
          SER. My mistress commends her secrets unto him, and
        presents him by me with a new satin suit here.
          JACK. Mass, that comes happily.
          SER. And she hopes the fashion will content him.
          JACK. There’s no doubt to be had of that, sir: your
        mistress’ name, I pray? you’re much preciously welcome.
          SER. I thank you uncommonly, sir.
          JACK. The suit shall be accepted, I warrant you, sir.
          SER. That’s all my mistress desires, sir.
          JACK. Fare you well, sir.
          SER. Fare you well, sir.                     [_Exit._
          JACK. This will make my master leap out of the bed for
        joy, and dance Wigmore’s galliard[622] in his shirt
        about the chamber![623]         [_Exit into the house._


                               SCENE II.


                    _A Hall in_ TAILBY’S _Lodging_.

            _Enter_ TAILBY, _and_ JACK _trussing him_.[624]

          TAI. Came this suit from mistress Cleveland?
          JACK. She sent it secretly, sir.
          TAI. A pretty requiteful squall! I like that woman that
        can remember a good turn three months after the date; it
        shews both a good memory and a very feeling spirit.
          JACK. This came fortunately, sir, after all your ill
        luck last night.
          TAI. I’d beastly casting, Jack.
          JACK. O abominable, sir! you had the scurviest hand: the
        old serving-man swooped up all.
          TAI. I am glad the fortune lighted upon the poor fellow,
        by my troth; it made his master mad.
          JACK. Did you mark that, sir? I warrant he has the
        doggedest master of any poor fellow under the dog-sign:
        I’d rather serve your worship, I’ll say that behind your
        back, sir, for nothing, as indeed I have no standing
        wages at all, your worship knows.
          TAI. O, but your vails, Jack, your vails considered,
        when you run to and fro between me and mistresses——
          JACK. I must confess my vails are able to keep an honest
        man, go I where I list.
          TAI. Go to then, Jack.
          JACK. But those vails stand with the state of your body,
        sir, as long as you hold up your head: if that droop
        once, farewell you, farewell I, farewell all; and droop
        it will, though all the caudles in Europe should put to
        their helping hands to’t: ’tis e’en as uncertain as
        playing, now up and now down;[625] for if the bill down
        rise to above thirty, here’s no place for players; so if
        your years rise to above forty, there’s no room for old
        lechers.
          TAI. And that’s[626] the reason all rooms are taken up
        for young templars.
          JACK. You’re in the right, sir.
          TAI. Pize on’t, I pawned a good beaver hat to master
        Frip last night, Jack: I feel the want of it now. Hark,
        who’s that knocks?        [_Knocking within._

          _Enter a Servant, bringing in a letter and a beaver
                                 hat._

          SER. Is master Tailby stirring?
          JACK. What’s your pleasure with him? he walks here i’
        th’ hall.
          SER. Give your worship good morrow.
          TAI. Welcome, honest lad.
          SER. A letter from my mistress.
          TAI. Who’s thy mistress?
          SER. Mistress Newblock.
          TAI. Mistress Newblock, my sincere love! how does she?
          SER. Faith, only ill in the want of your sight.
          TAI. Alas, dear sweet! I’ve had such business, I protest
        I ne’er stood still since I saw her.
          SER. She has sent your worship a beaver hat here, with a
        band best in fashion.
          TAI. How shall I requite this dear soul?
          SER. ’Tis not a thing fit for me to tell you, sir, for I
        have three years to serve yet: your worship knows how, I
        warrant you.
          TAI. I know the drift of her letter; and for the beaver,
        say I accept it highly.
          SER. O, she will be a proud woman of that, sir!
          TAI. And hark thee; tell thy mistress, as I’m a
        gentleman, I’ll despatch her out of hand the first thing
        I do, a’ my credit: canst thou remember these words now?
          SER. Yes, sir; as you are a gentleman, you’ll despatch
        her out of hand the first thing you do.
          TAI. Ay, a’ my credit.
          SER. O, of your credit; I thought not of that, sir.
          TAI. Remember that, good boy.
          SER. Fear it not now, sir.                   [_Exit._
          TAI. I dreamt to-night, Jack, I should have a secret
        supply out a’ th’ city.
          JACK. Your dream crawls out partly well, sir.—

                _Enter a Servant, bringing in a purse._

        What news there now?
          SER. I have an errand to master Tailby.
          JACK. Yonder walks my master.
          SER. Mistress Tiffany commends her to your worship, and
        has sent you your ten pound in gold back again, and says
        she cannot furnish you of the same lawn you desire till
        after All-holland-tide.[627]
          TAI. Thank her she would let me understand so much.
        [_Exit Servant._]—Ha, ha!
        This wench will live: why, this was sent like a
        Workwoman now; the rest are botchers to her.
        Faith, I commend her cunning: she’s a fool
        That makes her servant fellow to her heart;
        It robs her of respect, dams up all duty,
        Keeps her in awe e’en of the slave she keeps:
        This takes a wise course—I commend her more—
        Sends back the gold I never saw before.
        Well, women are my best friends [still], i’faith.
        Take[628] lands: give me
        Good legs, firm back, white hand, black eye, brown hair,
        And add but to these five a comely stature;
        Let others live by art, and I by nature.      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


             _A Room, with a door opening into_ FITSGRAVE’S
                             _Bed-chamber_.

                           _Enter_ GOLDSTONE.

          GOL. Master Bouser, master Bouser! ha, ha, ho! master
        Bouser!
          FIT. [_within_] Holla!
          GOL. What, not out of thy kennel, master Bouser?
          FIT. [_within_] Master Goldstone? you’re an early
        gallant, sir.
          GOL. A fair cloak yonder, i’faith. [_Aside._]—By my
        troth, ’a bed, master Bouser? you remember your promise
        well o’ernight!
          FIT. [_within_] Why, what’s a’ clock, sir?
          GOL. Do you ask that now? why, the chimes are spent at
        Saint Bride’s.
          FIT. [_within_] ’Tis a gentleman’s hour: faith, master
        Goldstone, I’ll be ready in a trice.
          GOL. Away, there’s no trust to you!
          FIT. [_within_] Faith, I’ll come instantly.
          GOL. Nay, choose whether you will or no,—by my troth,
        your cloak shall go before you.
                       [_Aside, and takes_ FITSGRAVE’S _cloak_.
          FIT. [_within_] Nay, master Goldstone, I ha’ sworn: do
        you hear, sir?
          GOL. Away, away! faith, I’m angry with you: pox, a-bed
        now! I’m ashamed of it.                        [_Exit._

          _As_ GOLDSTONE _goes out_, FITSGRAVE _enters in his
                                shirt_.

          FIT. Foot, my cloak, my cloak, master Goldstone!
        ’slife, what mean you by this, sir? you’ll bring it
        back again, I hope. No? not yet? by my troth, I care
        very little for such kind of jesting: methinks this
        familiarity now extends a little too far, unless it be
        a new fashion come forth this morning secretly;
        yesterday ’twould have shewn unmannerly and saucily. I
        scarce know yet what to think on’t. Well, there’s no
        great profit in standing in my shirt, I’ll on with my
        clothes: has bound me to follow the suit: my cloak’s a
        stranger; he was made but yesterday, and I do not love
        to trust him alone in company.                 [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                               A Street.

            _Enter_ FRIPPERY, _wearing_ FITSGRAVE’S _cloak_.

          FRI. What may I conjecture of this Goldstone? he has
        not only pawned to me this cloak, but the very diamond
        and sapphire which I bestowed upon my new love at master
        Primero’s house: the cloak’s new, and comes fitly to do
        me great grace at a wedding this morning, to which I was
        solemnly invited. I can continue change more than the
        proudest gallant of ’em all, yet never bestow penny of
        myself, my pawns do so kindly furnish me: but the sight
        of these jewels is able to cloy me, did I not preserve
        my stomach the better for the wedding-dinner. A gift
        could never have come in a more patient hour, nor to be
        better disgested.[629] Is she proved false?

        But I’ll not fret to-day nor chafe my blood.

                           _Enter_ PURSENET.

          PUR. Ha! yonder goes Bouser: the place is fit.—
        [_Calling out to Boy within._] Boy, stand with my horse
        at corner.—

        I owe you for a pink three inches deep, sir.
                                      [_Strikes down_ FRIPPERY.
          FRI. O—O—O!
          PUR. Take that in part of payment for Combe Park.
                          [_Exit._
        Fri. O—O—O!

                           _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.

          FIT. How now, who’s this? ’sfoot, one of our gallants
        knocked down like a calf! Is there such a plague of ’em
        here at London, they begin to knock ’em a’ th’ head
        already?
          FRI. O master Bouser! pray, lend me your hand, sir; I am
        slain!
          FIT. Slain and alive? O cruel execution!
        What man so savage-spirited durst presume
        To strike down satin on two taffetas cut,
        Or lift his hand against a beaver hat?
          FRI. Some rogue that owes me money, and had no other
        means. To a wedding-dinner! I must be dressed myself,
        methinks.
          FIT. How? why, this [is] my cloak: life, how came my
        cloak hither?
          FRI. Is it yours, sir? master Goldstone pawned it to me
        this morning fresh and fasting, and borrowed five pound
        upon’t.
          FIT. How, pawned it? pray, let me hear out this
        story: come, and I’ll lead[630] you to the next
        barber-surgeon’s.—Pawned my cloak?
                                 [_Exit, leading out_ FRIPPERY.


                                SCENE V.


                           _Another Street._

              _Enter_ BUNGLER, GOLDSTONE, _and_ MARMADUKE.

          BUN. How now, Marmaduke? what’s the wager?
          MAR. Nay, my care is at end, sir, now I am come to the
        sight of you. My mistress, your cousin, entreats you to
        take part of a dinner with her at her house,[631] and
        bring what gentleman you please to accompany you.
          BUN. Thank my sweet coz: I’ll munch with her, say.
          MAR. I’ll tell her so.
          BUN. Marmaduke——
          MAR. Sir?
          BUN. Will there be any stock-fish, thinkest thou?
          MAR. How, sir?
          BUN. Tell my coz I’ve a great appetite to stock-fish,
        i’faith. [_Exit_ MARMADUKE.]—Master Goldstone, I’ll
        entreat you to be the gentleman that shall accompany me.
          GOL. Not me, sir?
          BUN. You, sir.
          GOL.[632] By my troth, concluded. What state bears thy
        coz, sirrah?
          BUN. O, a fine merchant’s wife.
          GOL. Or rather, a merchant’s fine wife.
          BUN. Trust me, and that’s the properer phrase here at
        London; and ’tis as absurd too to call him fine
        merchant, for, being at sea, a man knows not what pickle
        he is in.
          GOL. Why, true.
          BUN. Yet my coz will be served in plate, I can tell you;
        she has her silver jugs and her gilt tankards.
          GOL. Fie!
          BUN. Nay, you shall see a house dressed up, i’faith; you
        must not think to tread a’ th’ ground when you come
        there.
          GOL. No? how then?
          BUN. Why, upon paths made of fig-frails[633] and white
        blankets cut out in steaks.[634]
          GOL. Away!—I have thought of a device. [_Aside._]—Where
        shall we meet an hour hence?
          BUN. In Paul’s.
          GOL. Agreed.                         [_Exit_ BUNGLER.

                           _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.

          FIT. The broker-gallant and the cheating-gallant:
        Now I have found ’em all, I so rejoice,
        That the redeeming of my cloak I weigh not.
        I have spied him.
          GOL. Pax,[635] here’s Bouser.
          FIT. Master Goldstone, my cloak! come, where’s my cloak,
        sir?
          GOL. O, you’re a sure gentleman, especially if a man
        stand in need of you! he may be slain in a morning to
        breakfast ere you vouchsafe to peep out of your lodging.
          FIT. How?
          GOL. No less than four gallants, as I’m a gentleman,
        drew all upon me at once, and opposed me so spitefully,
        that I not only lost your cloak i’ th’ fray——
          FIT. Comes it in there?
          GOL. But my rich hangers,[636] sirrah,—I think thou hast
        seen ’em.
          FIT. Never, i’faith, sir.
          GOL. Those with the two unicorns, all wrought in pearl
        and gold: pox on’t, it frets me ten times more than the
        loss of the paltry cloak: prithee, and[637] thou lovest
        me, speak no more on’t; it brings the unicorns into my
        mind, and thou wouldst not think how the conceit grieves
        me. I will not do thee that disgrace, i’faith, to offer
        thee any satisfaction, for in my soul I think thou
        scornest it; thou bearest that mind, in my conscience; I
        have always said so of thee. Fare thee well: when shall
        I see thee at my chamber, when?
          FIT. Every day, shortly.
          GOL. I have fine toys to shew thee.
          FIT. You win my heart then. [_Exit_ GOLDSTONE.] The
        devil scarce knew what a portion he gave his children
        when he allowed ’em large impudence to live upon, and so
        turned ’em into th’ world: surely he gave away the third
        part of the riches of his kingdom; revenues are but
        fools to’t.
        The filed[638] tongue and the undaunted forehead
        Are mighty patrimonies, wealthier than those
        The city-sire or the court-father leaves:
        In these behold it: riches oft, like slaves,
        Revolt; they bear their foreheads to their graves.
        What soonest grasps advancement, men’s[639] great suits,
        Trips down rich widows, gains repute and name,
        Makes way where’er it comes, bewitches all?
        Thou, Impudence! the minion of our days,
        On whose pale cheeks favour and fortune plays.
        Call you these your five gallants? trust me, they’re
           rare fellows:
        They live on nothing; many cannot live on something;
        Here they may take example.—Suspectless virgin,
        How easy had thy goodness been beguil’d!
        Now only rests, that as to me they’re known,
        So to the world their base arts may be shewn.  _Exit._


                               SCENE VI.


                 _The Middle Aisle of St. Paul’s._[640]

                      _Enter_ PURSENET _and Boy_.

          PUR. Art sure thou sawest him receive’t, boy?
          BOY. Forty pound in gold, as I’m a gentleman born.
          PUR. Thy father gave the ram’s head,[641] boy?
          BOY. No, you’re deceived; my mother gave that, sir.
          PUR. What’s thy mother’s is thy father’s.

                            _Enter_ PYAMONT.

          BOY. I’m sorry it holds in the ram’s head. See, here he
        walks; I was sure he came into Paul’s: the gold had been
        yours, master, long ere this, but that he wears both his
        hands in his pockets.
          PUR. How unfortunately is my purpose seated! what the
        devil should come in his mind to keep in his hands so
        long? the biting but of a paltry louse would do me great
        kindness now; I’d know[642] not how to requite it: will
        no rascal creature assist me? Stay, what if I did
        impudently salute ’em out? good. Boy, be ready, boy.
          BOY. Upon the least advantage, sir.
          PUR. You’re most devoutly met in Paul’s, sir.
          PY. So are you, but I scarce remember you, sir.
          PUR. O, I cry you mercy, sir; I pray, pardon me; I fear
        I have tendered an offence, sir: troth, I took you at
        the first for one master Dumpling, a Norfolk gentleman.
            [_While_ PURSENET _speaks, the Boy watches in vain
                        for an opportunity to pick_ PYAMONT’S
                        _pocket_.
          PY. There’s no harm done yet, sir.
          PUR. I hope he is there by this time. [_Aside._]—How
        now, boy, hast it?
          BOY. No, by troth, have I not; this labour’s lost: ’tis
        in the right pocket, and he kept that hand in sure
        enough.
          PUR. Unpractised gallant! salute me but with one hand,
        like a counterfeit soldier? O times and manners! are we
        grown beasts? do we salute by halves? are not our limbs
        at leisure?
        Where’s comely nurture? the Italian kiss,
        Or the French cringe, with the Polonian waist?
        Are all forgot?
        Then misery follows.—Surely fate forbade it:
        Had he employ’d but his right hand, I’d had it.

                            _Enter_ BUNGLER.

        It must be an everlasting device, I think, that procures
        both his hands out at once.
                                   [_Aside, and exit with Boy._
          PY. Do you walk, sir?[643]
          BUN. No, I stay a little for a gentleman’s coming too.

          PY. Farewell then, sir: I have forty pound in gold about
        me, which I must presently send down into the country.
          BUN. Fare you well, sir. [_Exit_ PYAMONT.]—I wonder
        master Goldstone spares my company so long; ’tis now
        about the navel of the day, upon the belly of noon.

            _Enter_ GOLDSTONE _and_ FULK, _both disguised_.

          GOL. See where he walks: be sure you let off at a
        twinkling, now.
          FULK. When did I miss you?—Your worship has forgot you
        promised mistress Newcut, your cousin, to dine with her
        this day.
          GOL. Mass, that was well remembered.
          BUN. I am bold to salute you, sir.
          GOL. Sir?
          BUN. Is mistress Newcut your cousin, sir?
          GOL. Yes, she’s a cousin of mine, sir.
          BUN. Then I am a cousin of yours, by the sister’s side.
          GOL. Let me salute you then; I shall be glad of your
        farther acquaintance.
          BUN. I am a bidden guest there too.
          GOL. Indeed, sir!
          BUN. Faith, invited this morning.
          GOL. Your good company shall be kindly embraced, sir.
          BUN. I walk a turn or two here for a gentleman, but I
        think he’ll either overtake me, or be before me.
          GOL. ’Tis very likely, sir.—There, sirrah, go to dinner,
        and about two wait for me.
          BUN. Nay, let him come between two and three, cousin,
        for we love to sit long at dinner i’ th’ city.
          GOL. Come, sweet cousin.
          BUN. Nay, cousin; keep your way, cousin; good cousin, I
        will not, i’faith, cousin.                    [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE VII.


        _A Room in_ MISTRESS NEWCUT’S _House_: MARMADUKE _laying
                         the cloth for dinner_.

                        _Enter_ MISTRESS NEWCUT.

          MIS. N. Why, how now, sirrah? upon twelve of the clock,
        and not the cloth laid yet? must we needs keep Exchange
        time still?
          MAR. I am about it, forsooth.
          MIS. N. You’re about it, forsooth? you’re still about
        many things, but you ne’er do one well. I am an ass to
        keep thee in th’ house, now my husband’s at sea; thou
        hast no audacity with thee; a foolish, dreaming lad,
        fitter to be in the garret than in any place else; no
        grace nor manly behaviour: when didst thou ever come to
        me but with thy head hanging down? O decheerful
        ’prentice, uncomfortable servant! [_Exit_ MARMADUKE.]—
        Pray heaven the gull, my cousin, has so much wit left as
        to bring master Tailby along with him, my comfort, my
        delight! for that was the chiefest cause I did invite
        him. I bade him bring what gentleman he pleased to
        accompany him; as far as I durst go: why may he not then
        make choice of master Tailby? had he my wit or feeling
        he would do’t.

             _Enter_ BUNGLER, _and_ GOLDSTONE _disguised_.

          BUN. Where’s my sweet cousin here? does she lack any
        guess?[644]
          MIS. N. Ever such guess as you: you’re welcome, cousin.
          GOL. I am rude, lady.
          MIS. N. You’re most welcome, sir.
          BUN. There will be a gallant here anon, coz; he promised
        faithfully.
          MIS. N. Who is’t? master Tailby?
          BUN. Master Tailby? no, master Goldstone.
          MIS. N. Master Goldstone? I could think well of that
        Goldstone were’t not for one vild[645] trick he has.
          GOL. What’s that, lady?
          MIS. N. In jest he will pawn his punks for suppers.
          GOL. That’s a vild part in him, i’faith, and[646] he
        were my brother.
          MIS. N. Pray, gentlemen, sit awhile; your dinner shall
        come presently.                                [_Exit._
          GOL. Yea, mistress Newcut? at first give me a trip?
        A close bite always asks a secret nip.        [_Aside._
          BUN. My cousin here is a very kind-natured soul,
        i’faith, in her humour.
          GOL. Pooh, you know her not so well as I, coz; I have
        observed her in all her humours; you ne’er saw her a
        little waspish, I think.
          BUN. I have [not], i’faith.
          GOL. Pooh, then ye ne’er saw pretty humour in your life;
        I can bring her into’t when I list.
          BUN. Would you could, i’faith!
          GOL. Would I could? by my troth, and I were sure thou
        couldst keep thy countenance, coz, what a pretty jest
        have I thought upon already to entertain time before
        dinner!
          BUN. Prithee, coz, what is’t? I love a jest a’
        life,[647] i’faith.
          GOL. Ah, but I am jealous[648] you will not keep your
        countenance, i’faith! Why, ye shall see a pretty story
        of a humour.[649] Faith, I’ll try you for once: you know
        my cousin will wonder when she comes in to see the cloth
        laid, and ne’er a salt upon the board.
          BUN. That’s true, i’faith.
          GOL. Now will I stand a while out of sight with it, and
        give her humour play a little.
          BUN. Coz, dost thou love me? and thou wilt ever do any
        thing for me, do’t.
          GOL. Marry, I build upon you[r] countenance.
          BUN. Why, dost thou think I’m an ass, coz?
          GOL. I would be loath to undertake it else; for if you
        should burst out presently, coz, the jest would be
        spoiled.
          BUN. Why, do not I know that? Away, stand close: [_exit_
        GOLDSTONE _with the salt-cellar_] so, so; mum, cousin.—A
        merry companion, i’faith: here will be good sport anon,—
        whist, she comes.

                      _Re-enter_ MISTRESS NEWCUT.

          MIS. N. I make you stay[650] long for a bad dinner
        here, cousin; if master Goldstone were come, the meat’s
        e’en ready.
          BUN. Some great business detains him, cousin; but he’ll
        not be long now.
          MIS. N. Why, how now? cuds my life!——
          BUN. Why——
          MIS. N. Was ever mistress so plagued with a
        shuttle-headed servant!—Why, Marmaduke!

                         _Re-enter_ MARMADUKE.

          MAR. I come, forsooth.
          MIS. N. Able to shame me from generation to generation!
          MAR. Did you call, forsooth?
          MIS. N. Come hither, forsooth: did you lay this cloth?
          MAR. Yes, forsooth.
          MIS. N. Do you use to lay a cloth without a salt, a
        salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt!
          MAR. How many salts would you have? I’m sure I set the
        best i’ th’ house upon the board.
          BUN. How, cousin? [_sings_] _Cousin, cousin, did call,
        coz?_
          MIS. N. Did you see a salt upon the board when you came
        in?
          BUN. Pooh!
          MIS. N. Come, come, I thought as much; beshrew your
        fingers, where is’t now?
          BUN. Your cousin yonder——
          MIS. N. Why, the man’s mad!
          BUN. Cousin, hist, cousin!
          MIS. N. What say you?
          BUN. Pooh, I call not you, I call my cousin.—Come forth
        with the salt, cousin! Ha! how? nobody? Why, was not he
        that came in e’en now your cousin?
          MIS. N. My cousin? O my bell-salt, O my great bell-salt!

                _Re-enter_ GOLDSTONE _in his own dress_.

          BUN. The tenor bell-salt. O, here comes master
        Goldstone now, cousin; he may tell us some news on him.—
        Did you not meet a fellow about door with a great silver
        salt under his arm?
          GOL. No, sure; I met none such.
          MIS. N. Pardon me, sir, I forgot all this while to bid
        you welcome. I shall loathe this room for ever. Take
        hence the cloth, you unlucky, maple-faced[651] rascal.—
        Come, you shall dine in my chamber, sir.
          GOL. No better place, lady.                [_Exeunt._


                              SCENE VIII.


                              _A Street._

                            _Enter_ PYAMONT.

          PY. No less than forty pound in fair gold at one lift!
        the next shall swoon and swoon again till the devil
        fetch him, ere I set hand to him. Heart, nothing vexes
        me so much, but that I paid the goldsmith[652] for the
        change too not an hour before: had I let it alone in the
        chain of silver as it was at first, it might have given
        me some notice at his departure: ’sfoot, I could fight
        with a windmill now. Sure ’twas some unlucky villain:
        why should he come and salute me wrongfully too, mistake
        me at noonday? Now I think on’t in cold blood, it could
        not be but an induction to some villanous purpose: well,
        I shall meet him——

                           _Enter_ PURSENET.

          PUR. This forty pound came fortunately to redeem my
        chain of pearl from mortgage: I would not care how often
        I swooned[653] to have such a good caudle[654] to
        comfort me; gold and pearl are[655] very restorative.

          PY. See, yonder’s the rogue I suspect for foul play!
        I’ll walk muffled by him, offer some offence or cause of
        a quarrel, only to try his temper; if he be a coward,
        he’s the likelier to be a rogue, an infallible note.
                                           [_Jostles_ PURSENET.
          PUR. What a pox ail you, sir? would I had been aware of
        you!
          PY. Sir, speak you to me?
          PUR. Not I, sir: pray, keep on your way; I have nothing
        to say to you.
          PY. You’re a rascal!
          PUR. You may say your pleasure, sir; but I hope I go not
        like a rascal.
          PY. Are you fain to fly to your clothes because you’re
        gallant? why, there’s no rascal like your gallant
        rascal, believe that.
          PUR. You have took me at such an hour, faith, you may
        call me e’en what you please; nothing will move me.
          PY. No? I’ll make somewhat move you. Draw! I suspected
        you were a rogue, and you have purst it up well with a
        coward!
          PUR. Who, my patron?
          PY. Keep out, you rascal!
          PUR. The guest that did me the kindness in Paul’s? Hold!
        as you are a gentleman; you’ll give me breath, sir?
                  [_Exit running; and as he goes out, drops the
                          chain of pearl._
          PY. Are you there with me? a vengeance stop you! You
        have found breath enough to run away from me. I will
        never meet this slave hereafter in a morning but I will
        breathe myself upon him; since I can have no other
        satisfaction, he shall save me that forty pound in
        fence-school.                                  [_Exit._

                           _Enter_ GOLDSTONE.

          GOL. When things are cleanly carried, sign of judgment:
        I was the welcom’st gallant to her alive
        After the salt was stolen; then a good dinner,
        A fine provoking meal, which drew on apace
        The pleasure of a day-bed, and I had it;
        This here one ring can witness: when I parted,
        Who but _sweet master Goldstone_? I left her in that
           trance.
        What cannot wit, so it be impudent,
        Devise and compass? I’d[656] fain know that fellow now
        That would suspect me but for what I am;
        He lives not:
        ’Tis all in the conveyance.[657] What! thou look’st not
        Like a beggar: what mak’st thou on the ground?
        I’ve[658] a hand to help thee up: a fair chain of pearl!
                  [_Takes up the chain of pearl which_ PURSENET
                          _had dropt_.
        Surely a merchant’s wife gives lucky handsel:
        They that find pearl may wear’t at a cheap rate;
        Marry, my lady dropt it from her arm
        For a device to tole me to her bed:
        I’ve seen as great a matter.—Who be these?
        I’ll be too crafty for you.—

                    _Enter_ PRIMERO _and_ FRIPPERY.

        O monsieur Primero, signior Frip; is it you, gallants?'
          FRI. Sweet master Goldstone!      [_They talk apart._

                  _Enter_ TAILBY _and two Constables_.

          TAI. Every bawd exceeds me in fortune: master Primero
        was robbed of a carkanet[659] upon Monday last;
        laid[660] the goldsmiths, and found it. I ha’ laid
        goldsmith,[661] jeweller, burnisher, broker, and the
        devil and all, I think, yet could never so much as hear
        of that chain of pearl: he was a notable thief; he works
        close. Peace, who be these? ha, let me see. By this
        light, there it is! Back, lest they see thee: a happy
        minute! Goldstone? What an age do we breathe in! who
        that saw him now would think he were maintained by
        purses? so, who that meets me would think I were
        maintained by wenches? As far as I can see, ’tis all
        one case, and holds both in one court; we are both
        maintained by the common roadway! Keep thou thine own
        heart, thou livest unsuspected. I leese[662] you again
        now.
          GOL. But, I pray you, tell me,
        Met you no gentlewomen by the way you came?
          FRI. Not any: what should they be?
          GOL. Nay, I do but ask,
        Because a gentlewoman’s glove was found
        Near to the place I met you.
          PRI. Faith, we saw none, sir.
          TAI. Good officers, upon suspicion of felony.
          S. CON. Very good, sir.
          F. CON. What call you the thief’s name you do suspect?
          TAI. Master Justinian Goldstone.
          F. CON. Remember, master Justice Goldstone; a terrible
        world the whilst, my masters!
          TAI. Look you, that’s he: upon him, officers!
          F. CON. I see him not yet; which is he, sir?
          TAI. Why, that.
          F. CON. He a thief, sir? who, that gentleman i’ th’
        satin?
          TAI. E’en he.
          F. CON. Farewell, sir; you’re a merry gentleman.
          TAI. As you will answer it, officers! I’ll bear you out,
        I’ll be your warrant.
          F. CON. Nay, and[663] you say so—what’s his name then?
          TAI. Justinian Goldstone.
          F. CON. Master Justinian Goldstone, we apprehend you,
        sir, upon suspicion of felony.
          GOL. Me?
          TAI. You, sir.
          S. CON. I charge you, in the king’s name, gentlemen, to
        assist us.
          GOL. Master Tailby!
          TAI. The same man, sir.
          GOL. Life, what’s the news?
          TAI. Ha’ you forgot Combe Park?
          GOL. Combe Park? no, ’tis in Kingston way.
          TAI. I believe you’ll find it so.
          GOL. I not deny it.
          F. CON. Bear witness, has confessed.
          GOL. What have I confessed? Pair of coxcombs
        indubitable!
          TAI. I was robb’d finely of this chain of pearl there,
        And forty fair spur-royals.[664]
          GOL. Did I rob you?
          TAI. There where I find my goods I may suspect, sir.
          FRI. I dreamt this would be his end.         [_Aside._
          GOL. See how I am wrong’d, gentlemen:
        As I’ve[665] a soul, I found this chain of pearl
        Not three yards from this place, just when I met you.
          TAI. Ha, ha!
          FRI. Yet the law’s such, if he but swear ’tis you,
        You’re gone.
          GOL. Pox on’t, that e’er I saw’t!
          FRI. Can you but swear ’tis he? do but that, and you
        tickle him, i’faith.
          TAI. Nay, and[666] it come once to swearing, let me
        alone.
          FRI. Say, and hold; he called my jewels counterfeit, and
        so cheated the poor wench of ’em.
          F. CON. Come, bring him away, come.
          GOL. ’Twill call my state in question.

                          _Re-enter_ PURSENET.

          PUR. I think what’s got by theft doth never prosper;
        Now lost my chain of pearl.—Come, master Goldstone,
        Let go; ’tis[667] mine, i’faith.
          GOL. The chain of pearl?
          PUR. By my troth, it’s mine.
          GOL. By my troth, much good do’t you, sir.
          FRI. I’m glad in my soul, sir.[668]
          F. CON. Deliver your weapons.
          PUR. How?
          F. CON. You’re apprehended upon suspicion of felony.
          PUR. Felony? what’s that?
          TAI. Was it you, i’faith, sir, all this while, that did
        me that kindness to ease both my pockets at Combe Park?
          PUR. I, sir? Pray, gentlemen, draw near; let’s talk
        among ourselves.—Stand apart, scoundrel.—Must every
        gentleman be upbraided in public that flies out now and
        then upon necessity, to be themes for pedlars and
        weavers? This should not be; ’twas never seen among the
        Romans, nor read we of it in the time of Brute: are we
        more brutish now? Did I list to blab, do not I know your
        course of life, master Tailby, to be as base as the
        basest, maintained by me, by him, by all of us, and ’a
        second-hand from mistresses? I’ve their letters here to
        shew.
        Why should you be so violent to strip naked
        Another’s reputation to the world,
        Knowing your own so leprous?
        Beside, this chain of pearl and those spur-royals[669]
        Came to you falsely; for she broke her faith,
        And made her soul a strumpet with her body,
        When she sent those; they were ever justly mine.—
        Pray, what moves you, sir? why should you shake your
        head? you’re clear; sure I should know you, sir: pray,
        are not you sometimes a pander, and oftener a bawd, sir?
        have I never sinned in your banqueting boxes, your
        bowers and towers? You slave, that keeps fornication
        upon the tops of trees! the very birds cannot engender
        in quiet for you: why, rogue, that goes in good clothes
        made out of wenches’ cast gowns——
          PRI. Nothing goes so near my heart as that.
          PUR. Do you shake your slave’s noddle?
          TAI. And here’s a rascal, look, a’ ’s way[670]
        too—saving the presence of master Goldstone—a
        filthy-slimy-lousy-nittical broker, pricked up in
        pawns from the hat-band to the shoe-string; a
        necessary hook to hang gentlemen’s suits out i’
        th’ air, lest they should grow musty with long
        lying, which his pawns seldom are guilty of; a
        fellow of several scents and steams, French,
        Dutch, Italian, English, and therefore his lice
        must needs be mongrels: why, bill-money——
          GOL. I am sorry to hear this among you: you’ve all
        deceived me; truly I took you for other spirits. You
        must pardon me henceforward; I have a reputation to look
        to; I must be no more seen in your companies.
          FRI. Nay, nay, nay, nay, master Goldstone, you must not
        ’scape so, i’faith; one word before you go, sir.
          GOL. Pray, despatch then; I would not for half my
        revenues, i’faith, now, that any gallants should pass by
        in the meantime, and find me in your companies; nay, as
        quick as you can, sir.
          FRI. You did not take away master Bouser’s cloak t’other
        morning, pawned it to me, and borrowed five pound
        upon’t?
          GOL. Ha!
          FRI. ’Twas not you neither that finely cheated my little
        novice at master Primero’s house of a diamond and
        sapphire, and swore they were counterfeit, both glass,
        mere glass, as you were a right gentleman?
          GOL. ’Slife, why were we strangers all this while?
        ’Sfoot, I perceive we are all natural brothers! A pox
        on’s all, are we found, i’faith?
          FRI. A cheater!
          GOL. A thief, a lecher, a bawd, and a broker!
          F. CON. What mean they to be so merry? I’m afraid they
        laugh at us, and make fools on’s.
          GOL. Push,[671] leave it to me.—How now, who would you
        speak withal?
          F. CON. Speak withal! Have we waited all this while for
        a suspected thief?
          GOL. How? You’re scarce awake yet, I think: look well,
        does any appear like a thief in this company? Away, you
        slaves! you stand loitering when you should look to the
        commonwealth: you catch knaves apace now, do you not?
        they may walk by your nose, you rascals!
                                          [_Exeunt Constables._
          ALL. Sweet master Goldstone!
          GOL. You lacked spirit in your company till I came among
        you: here be five on’s; let’s but glue together, why now
        the world shall not come between us.
          PUR. If we be true among ourselves.
          GOL. Why, true; we cannot lack to be rich, for we cannot
        lack riches, nor can our wenches want, nor we want
        wenches.
          PRI. Let me alone to furnish you with them.
          TAI. And me.
          GOL. There’s one care past: and as for the knight’s
             daughter,
        Our chiefest business, and least thought upon—
          PUR. That’s true, i’faith.
          TAI. How shall we agree for her?
          GOL. With as much ease
        As for the rest. To-morrow brings the night:
        Let’s all appear in the best shape we may;
        Troth is, we have need on’t:
        And when amongst us five she makes election,
        As one she shall choose—
          PUR. True, she cannot [but] choose.
          GOL. That one so fortunate amongst us five
        Shall bear himself more portly, live regarded,
        Keep house, and be a countenance to the rest.
          ALL. Admirable![672]
          GOL. For instance;
        Put case yourself, after some robbery done,
        Were pursu’d hardly, why there were your shelter,
        You know your sanctuary; nay, say you were taken,
        His letter to the justice will strike’t dead:
        ’Tis policy to receive one for the head.
          ALL. Let’s hug thee, Goldstone.
          GOL. What have I begot?
          PUR. What, sir?
          GOL. I must plot for you all; it likes[673] me rarely.
          TAI. Prithee, what is’t, sir?
          GOL. ’Twould strike Fitsgrave pale,
        And make the other suitors appear blanks.
          FRI. For our united mysteries.
          GOL. What if we five presented our full shapes
        In a strange-gallant and conceited masque?
          PUR. In a masque? your thoughts and mine were twins.
          TAI. So the device were subtle, nothing like it.
          FRI. Some poet must assist us.
          GOL. Poet?
        You’ll take the direct line to have us stag’d.[674]
        Are you too well, too safe? Why, what lacks Bouser?
        An absolute scholar; easy to be wrought,
        No danger in the operation.
          PUR. But have you so much interest?
          GOL. What, in Bouser?
        Why, my least word commands him.
          TAI. Then no man fitter.
          PUR. And there’s master Frip too
        Can furnish us of masquing suits enow.
          FRI. Upon sufficient pawn, I think I can, sir.
          PUR. Pawn? Jew, here, take my chain: pawns among
             brothers?
        We shall thrive![675]
        But we must still expect one rogue in five,
        And think us happy too.

                           _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.

          GOL. Last man we spoke on, master Bouser.
          PUR. Little master Bouser.[676]
          TAI. Sweet master Bouser——
          FRI. Welcome, i’faith.
          FIT. Are your fathers dead, gentlemen, you’re so merry?
          GOL. By my troth, a good jest! Did not I commend his wit
        to you, gentlemen? Hark, sirrah Ralph Bouser, cousin
        Bouser, i’faith, there’s a kind of portion in town, a
        girl of fifteen hundred, whom we all powerfully affect,
        and determine to present our parts to her in a masque.
          FIT. In a masque?
          GOL. Right, sir: now, a little of thy brain for a device
        to present us firm, which we shall never be able to do
        ourselves, thou knowest that; and with a kind of speech
        wherein thou mayst express what gallants are, bravely.
          FIT. Pooh, how can I express ’em otherwise but
             bravely?
        Now for a Mercury, and all were fitted.
          PUR. Could not a boy supply it?
          FIT. Why, none better.
          PUR. I have a boy shall put down all the Mercuries i’
        th’ town; ’a will play a Mercury naturally, at his
        fingers’ end[s], i’faith.
          FIT. Why then we are suited: for torch-bearers and
        shield-boys, those are always the writer’s
        properties;[677] you’re not troubled with them.

          GOL. Come, my little Bouser, do’t finely now, to the
        life.
          FIT. I warrant you, gentlemen.
          FRI. Hist; give me a little touch above the rest,
        and[678] you can possible, for I mean to present this
        chain of pearl to her.
          FIT. Now I know that, let me alone to fit you.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                           _A Chamber._[679]

                _Enter Courtesans and_ MISTRESS NEWCUT.

          FIRST C. Come forth, you wary, private-whispering
        strumpet! Have we found your close haunts, your private
        watch-towers, and your subtle means?
          MIS. N. How then?
          SEC. C. You can steal secretly hither, you mystical
        quean you, at twilight, twitter-lights![680]
        You have a privilege from your hat,[681] forsooth,
        To walk without a man, and no suspicion;
        But we poor gentlewomen that go in tires
        Have no such liberty, we cannot do thus:
        Custom grants that to you that’s shame in us.
          MIS. N. Have you done yet?
          SEC. C. You broke the back of one husband already; and
        now th’ other’s dead with grief at sea, with your secret
        expenses, close stealths, cunning filches, and continued
        banquets in corners. Then, forsooth, you must have your
        milk-baths to white you, your rose-leaves to sweeten
        you, your bean-flour bags[682] to sleek you, and
        make you soft, smooth, and delicate, for lascivious
        entertainment!
          MIS. N. So, and you think all this while you dance like
        a thief in a mist, you’re safe, nobody can find you!
        Pray, were not you a feltmonger’s daughter at first,
        that run away with a new courtier for the love of
        gentlewomen’s clothes, and bought the fashion at a dear
        rate, with the loss of your name and credit? Why, what
        are all of you but rustical insides and city flesh, the
        blood of yeomen, and the bum of gentlewomen?
          SEC. C. What, shall we suffer a changeable forepart to
        out-tongue us? Take that!             [_Attacking her._
          MIS. N. Murder, murder!

                           _Enter_ FITSGRAVE.

          FIT. How now! Why, ladies, a retreat! come, you
        have shewn your spirits sufficiently: you’re all
        land-captains; and so they shall find that come in
        your quarters; but have you the law free now to
        fight and scratch among yourselves, and let your
        gallants run away with others?[683]
          FIRST C. How!
          SEC. C. Good——
          FIRST C. Sweet master Bouser!
          MIS. N. Another?                            [_Aside._
          FIT. Why, then, I perceive you know nothing: why, they
        are in the way of marriage; a knight’s daughter here in
        town makes her election among ’em this night.
          FIRST C. This night?
          FIT. This very night; and they all present themselves in
        a masque before her: know you not this?
          SEC. C. O traitor master Goldstone!
          THIRD C.[684] Perjured master Tailby!
          MIS. N. Without soul?                       [_Aside._
          FIRST C. She will chase him!
          FIT. You have more cause to join,
        And play the grounds of friendship ’mongst yourselves,
        Than rashly run division: I could tell you
        A means to pleasure you——
          FIRST C. Good master Bouser!
          FIT. But that you’re women, and are hardly secret——
          SEC. C. We vow it seriously.
          FIT. You should be all there in presence,
        See all, hear all, and yet not they perceive you.
          THIRD C. So that——
          MIS. N. Sweet master Bouser, I——
          FIT. I can stand you in stead;
        For I frame the device——
          ALL. If ever——
          FIT. Will you do’t—hark you—             [_Whispers._
          FIRST C. Content.
          SEC. C. And I’ll make one.
          THIRD C. And I another:
        We’ll mar the match.
          MIS. N. When that good news[685] came of my husband’s
             death,
        Goldstone[686] promis’d me marriage,
        And sware to me——
          SEC. C. I’ll bring his oaths in question.
          FIRST C. So will I.[687]
          FIT. Agree among yourselves, for shame!
          FIRST C. Are we resolv’d?
          SEC. C. In this who would not feign?
          THIRD C. Friends all, for my part.
          MIS. N. Here’s my[688] lip for mine.
          THIRD C. Round let it go.
          SEC. C. All wrath thus quench’d.
          FIRST C. And I conclude it so.
                                [_Exeunt all except_ FITSGRAVE.
          FIT. How all events strike even with my wishes!
        Their own invention damns them.—

           _Enter two Gentlemen, and_ PYAMONT _and_ BUNGLER.

                                         Now, gentlemen,
        Stands your assistance firm?
          FIRST G. Why, ’tis our own case;
        I’m sorry you should doubt.
          SEC. G. We’ll furnish you.
          BUN.[689] Are these our gallants?
          FIT. Are our gallants these?

                     _Enter Painter with Shields._

          PAI. Here be five shields, sir.
          FIT. Finished already? that’s well: I’ll see thy master
        shortly.
          PAI. I’m satisfied.                          [_Exit._
          PY. Prithee, let’s see, master Fitsgrave.
          FIT. I have blazed them.
          FIRST G. What’s this?
          SEC. G. Fooh,[690] you should be a gallant too, for
        you’re no university scholar.
          FIT. Look, this is Pursenet; the device, a purse wide
        open, and the mouth downward: the word,[691] _Alienis
        ecce crumenis_!
          FIRST G. What’s that?
          FIT. _One that lives out of other men’s pockets._
          PY. That’s right!
          FIT. Here’s Goldstone’s, three silver dice.
          FIRST G. They run high, two cinques and a quater!
          FIT. They’re high-men,[692] fit for his purpose: the
        word, _Fratremque patremque_.
          SEC. G. Nay, he will cheat his own brother; nay, his own
        father, i’faith!
          FIT. So much the word imports.—Master Primero—
          BUN.[693] Pox, what says he now?
          FIT. The device, an unvalued[694] pearl hid in a cave;
        the word, _Occultos vendit honores_.
          FIRST G. What’s that?
          FIT. _One that sells maidenheads by wholesale._
          SEC. G. Excellently proper!
          FIT. Master Frip——
          SEC. G. That Pythagorical rascal![695] in a gentleman’s
        suit to-day, in a knight’s to-morrow.
          FIT. The device for him, a cuckoo sitting on a tree; the
        word, _En avis ex avibus! one bird made of many_; for
        you know as the sparrow hatches the cuckoo, so the
        gentleman feathers the broker.
          FIRST G. Let me admire thee, master Fitsgrave!
          FIT. They will scorn gentlemen; and to assist them the
        better, Pursenet’s boy, that little precious pickpocket,
        has a compendious speech in Latin, and, like a Mercury,
        presents their dispositions more liberally.
          FIRST G. Never were poor gallants so abused.
          FIT. Hang ’em!
        They’re counterfeits; no honest spirit will pity ’em.
        This is my crown;[696]
        So good men smile, I dread no rascal’s frown.
        Away, bestow yourselves secretly o’erhead;
        This is the place appointed for the rehearsal,
        To practise their behaviours.
          FIRST G. We are vanish’d.

                [_Exeunt two Gentlemen_, PYAMONT, _and_ BUNGLER,
                      _who presently station themselves above_.

        _Enter_ GOLDSTONE, PURSENET, TAILBY, FRIPPERY, PRIMERO,
                               _and Boy_.

          GOL. Master Bouser——
          PUR. Well said, i’faith; off with your cloaks, gallants;
        let’s fall roundly to our business.
          TAI. Is the boy perfect?
          FIT. That’s my credit, sir, I warrant you.
          FRI. If our little Mercury should be out, we should
        scarce be known what we are.
          FIT. I have took a course for that, fear it not, sir.
        Look you, first, here be your shields.
          GOL. Ay, where be our shields?
          PUR. Which is mine?
          TAI. Which is mine, master Bouser? this?
          FIT. I pray, be contained[697] a little, gentlemen;
        they’ll come all time enough to you, I warrant.
          PUR. This Frip is grown so violent!
          FIT. Yours to begin withal, sir.
          PUR. Well said, master Bouser!
          FIT. First the[698] device, a fair purse wide open, the
        mouth downward; the word, _Alienis ecce crumenis_!
          PUR. What’s that, prithee?
          FIT. _Your bounty pours itself forth to all men._
          PUR. And so it does, i’faith; that’s all my fault,
        bountiful.
          FIT. Master Goldstone, here’s yours, sir: three silver
        dice; the word, _Fratremque patremque_.
          GOL. And what’s that?
          FIT. _Fortune of my side._
          GOL. Well said, little Bouser, i’faith!
          TAI. What say you to me, sir?
          FIT. For the device, a candle in a corner; the word,
        _Consumptio victus_.
          TAI. The meaning of that, sir?
          FIT. _My light is yet in darkness till I enjoy her._
          TAI. Right, sir.[699]
          PRI. Now mine, sir?
          FIT. The device, an unvalued[700] pearl hid in a cave.
          PRI. Aha, sirs!
          FIT. The word, _Occultos vendit honores_.
          PRI. Very good, I warrant.
          FIT. _A black man’s a pearl in a fair lady’s eye._
          PRI. I said ’twas some such thing.
          FRI. My turn must needs come now: am I fitted, master
        Bouser?
          FIT. Trust to me; your device here is a cuckoo sitting
        on a tree.
          FRI. The Welsh leiger;[701] good.
          FIT. The word, _En avis ex avibus_!
          FRI. Ay, marry, sir.
          FIT. Why do you know what ’tis, sir?
          FRI. No, by my troth, not yet, sir.
          FIT. O!—_I keep one tune, I recant not_.
          FRI. I’m like the cuckoo in that indeed: where I love I
        hold.
          FIT. Did I not promise you I would fit you?
          GOL. They’re all very well done, i’faith, and very
        scholarlike, though I say’t before thy face, little
        Bouser; but I would not have thee proud on’t now: come,
        if this be performed well——
          PUR. Who, the boy? he has performed deeper matters than
        this.
          PY. Ay, a pox on him! I think was in my pocket now,
        and[702] truth were known.                     [_Aside._
          BUN. I caught him once in mine.              [_Aside._
          FIT. Suppose the shields are presented, then you begin,
        boy.
          BOY. I, representing Mercury, am a pickpocket, and have
        his part at my fingers’ ends: _Page I am to that great
        and secret thief, magno illo et secreto latroni_——
          FIT.[703] There you make your honour, sir.
          BOY. At _latroni_?
          FIT.[704] You have it, sir.
          PUR.[705] _Latroni_, that’s mine.
          FIT. He confesses the thief’s his.
          PUR. Remember, boy, you point _latroni_ to me.
          BOY. To you, master.
          FIT. Proceed.[706]
          BOY.[707] _These four are his companions: the one a
        notable cheater, that will cozen his own father_——
          FIT. Master Goldstone.
          GOL. Let me alone, master Bouser; I can take mine own
        turn.
          FIT. Why——
          GOL. Peace.
          BOY.[708] _The second a notorious lecher, maintained by
        harlots, cujus virtus consumptio corporis._[709]
          TAI. That’s I, master Bouser.
          FIT. There you remember your honour, sir.
          BOY. _Ille leno pretiosissimus, virgineos ob lucrum
        vendens honores._
          PUR.[710] It sounds very well, i’faith.
          BOY. _Postremus ille, quamvis apparatu splendidus, is no
        otherwise but a broker; these feathers are not his own,
        sed avis ex avibus: all which to be nothing but truth
        will appear by the event._
          FIT. I’faith, here’s all now, gentlemen.
          GOL. Short and pithy.
          TAI. A good boy, i’faith, and a pregnant!
          PUR. I dare put trust in the boy, sir.—Forget not,
        sirrah, at any hand, to point that same _latroni_ to me.
          BOY. I warrant you, master.
          GOL. Come, gentlemen, the time beckons us away.
          FIT. Ay, furnish, gentlemen, furnish.
          PUR. Hark, one word, master Bouser: what’s the same
        _latroni_? I have a good mind to that word, i’faith.
          FIT. _Latroni_? why, _shrieve_[711] _of the shire_.
          PUR. I’faith, and I have shriven some shires in my days.
                         [_Exeunt_ GOLDSTONE, PURSENET, TAILBY,
                                 FRIPPERY, PRIMERO, _and Boy_.
          FIT. Now, gentlemen, are you satisfied and pleas’d?
          FIRST G. Never more amply.
          FIT. Amongst us now falls that desired lot,
        For we shall blast five rivals with one plot.
                      [_Exit: and exeunt Gentlemen, &c. above._


                               SCENE II.


                    _A Hall in_ KATHERINE’S _House_.

           _Enter_ KATHERINE _between two ancient Gentlemen_.

          KAT. Grave gentlemen, in whose approved bosoms
        My deceas’d father did repose much faith,
        You’re dearly welcome: pray, sit, command music;
        See nothing want to beautify this night,
        That holds my election in her peaceful arms;
        Feasts, music, hymns, those sweet celestial charms.[712]
          FIRST G. May you be blest in this election!
          SEC. G. That content may meet perfection!

                                 HYMN.

                _Sound lute, bandora,[713] gittern,
                Viol, virginals, and cittern;
                Voices spring, and lift aloud
                Her name that makes the music proud!
                      This night perfection
                      Makes her election.
        Follow, follow, follow, follow round,
        Look you to that, nay, you to that, nay, you to that:
        Anon you will be found, anon you will be found, anon you
           will be found._

        [_Cornets sound: enter the Masque,[714] thus ordered: a
            torch-bearer, a shield-boy, then a masquer, so
            throughout; then the shield-boys fall at one end,
            the torch-bearers at the other; the masquers i’ th’
            middle: the torch-bearers are the five gentlemen_
            [FITSGRAVE, PYAMONT, BUNGLER, _and two others_];
            _the shield-boys the whores_ [_three Courtesans,
            Novice, and_ MISTRESS NEWCUT] _in boys’ apparel; the
            masquers the five gallants_ [PURSENET, GOLDSTONE,
            TAILBY, PRIMERO, _and_ FRIPPERY]: _they bow to her;
            she rises and shews the like: they dance, but first
            deliver the shields up; she reads. The speech: their
            action._
          KAT. [_reads_] _Alienis ecce crumenis!_
                                       [PURSENET _bows to her_.

        [_reads_] _Fratremque patremque._
                                      [GOLDSTONE _bows to her_.

        [_reads_] _Consumptio victus._   [TAILBY _bows to her_.
        [_reads_] _Occultos vendit honores._
                                        [PRIMERO _bows to her_.
        A cuckoo: [_reads_] _En avis ex avibus!_
                                       [FRIPPERY _bows to her_.
        Are you all as the speech and shields display you?
          GOL. We shall prove so.
          [_They going to dance, each unhasps his weapon from
              his side, and gives it to the torch-bearers._
              KATHERINE _seems distrustful, but then_ FITSGRAVE
              _whispers to her and falls back. At the end of
              which, all making an honour_, FRIPPERY _presents
              her with that chain of pearl_.
          KAT. The very chain of pearl was filch’d from me!
          FIT. Hold! stop the boy there!
                              [_Boy seized_: PURSENET _stamps_.
          KAT. Will none lay hands on him?  [FRIPPERY _seized_.
          GOL. How now?
          FRI. Alas, I’m but a broker! ’twas pawned to me in my
        shop.
                  [FITSGRAVE, PYAMONT, _and the others discover
                        themselves_.
          TAI. Ha, Fitsgrave!
          PUR. Pyamont, and the rest!
          GOL. Where’s Bouser?
          FIT. Here.
          GOL. We are all betrayed!
          FIT. Betrayed? you’re new forth to betrayed, you have
        not so much worth: nay, struggle not with the net, you
        are caught for this world.
          FIRST C. Would we were out!
          FIT. ’Twas I fram’d your device, do you see?  ’twas I:
        The whole assembly has took notice of it.
        That you are a gallant cheater,
        So much the pawning of my cloak contains;
                                               [_To_ GOLDSTONE.

        You a base thief, think of Combe Park [_to_ PURSENET];
           and tell me[715]
        That you’re a hirèd smockster [_to_ TAILBY]; here’s her
           letter,
        In which we are certified that you’re[716] a bawd.
                                                 [_To_ PRIMERO.
          FIRST G. The broker has confessed it. SEC. G. So has the
        boy. TAI. That boy will be hanged; he stole the chain at
        first, and has thus long maintained his master’s
        gallantry.
          FIT. All which we here present, like captive slaves,
        Waiting that doom which their presumption craves.
          KAT. How easily may our suspectless sex
        With fair-appearing shadows be deluded!
        Dear sir, you have the work so well begun,
        That took from you, small glory would be won.
          FIT. Since ’tis your pleasure to refer to me
        The doom of these, I have provided so,
        They shall not altogether lose their cost:
        See, I have brought wives for ’em.
                    [_The Courtesans, &c. discover themselves._
          GOL. Heart, the strumpets! out, out!
          TAI. Having assum’d, out of their impudence,
        The shape of shield-boys!
          FRI. To heap full confusion!
          FIRST C. Rather confine us to strict chastity,
        A mere impossible task, than to wed these,
        Whom we [do] loathe worse than the foul’st disease.
          GOL. O grant ’em their requests!
          FIT. The doom is past: so, since your aim was
             marriage,
        Either embrace it in these courtesans,
        Or have your base acts and felonious lives
        Proclaim’d to the indignation of the law,
        Which will provide a public punishment.
        As for the boy, and that infectious bawd,
        We put forth those to whipping.
          PRI. Whipping? you find not that in the statute to whip
        satin.
          FIT. Away with him!       [PRIMERO _and Boy led off_.
          GOL. Since all our shifts are discovered, as far as I
        can see, ’tis our best course to marry ’em; we’ll make
        them get our livings.
          PUR. He says true.
          MIS. N. You see how we are threatened: by my troth,
        wenches, be ruled by me; let’s marry ’em, and[717] it be
        but to plague ’em; for when we have husbands we are
        under covert-baron,[718] and may lie with whom we list:
        I have tried that in my t’other husbands’ days.
          ALL THE C. A match.
          FIT. I’ll be no more deferr’d: come, when do you join?
          GOL. These forc’d marriages do never come to good.
          FIT. How can they, when the[y] come to such as you?
          PUR. The[y] often prove the ruin of great houses.
          FIT.[719] Nor, virgin, do I in this seek to entice
        All glory to myself; these gentlemen,
        Whom[720] I am bound to love for kind assistance,
        Had great affinity in the plot with me.
          KAT. To them I give my thanks; myself to thee,
        Thrice-worthy Fitsgrave!
          FIT. I have all my wishes.
          KAT. And I presume there’s none but those can frown,
        Whose envies, like the rushes, we tread down.
                                               [_Exeunt omnes._

                        A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS.

              _A Mad World, my Masters. As it hath bin lately in
              Action by the Children of Paules. Composed by T.
              M. London, Printed by H. B. for Walter Bvrre, and
              are to be sold in Paules Churchyard, at the signe
              of the Crane._ 1608. 4to. A second ed. appeared
              1640. 4to.

              This drama has been reprinted (most carelessly) in
              the several editions of Dodsley’s _Coll. of Old
              Plays_, vol. v.

              _A Mad World, my Masters_, was licensed by the
              deputy of Sir George Bucke, 4th Oct. 1608: see
              Chalmers’s _Suppl. Apol._, p. 199.

              _The City Heiress, or Sir Timothy Treatall_, 1682,
              by Mrs. Behn, and _The Country Lasses, or the
              Custom of the Manor_, 1715, by Charles Johnson,
              are partly taken from the present play.

                       THE PRINTER AND STATIONER
                                 TO THE
                          GENTLE READER.[721]

                             --------------


              Courteous reader, let not the title or name of
              this comedy be any forestalling or weakening of
              the worthy author’s judgment, whose known
              abilities will survive to all posterities,
              though he be long since dead. I hope the reading
              thereof shall not prove distasteful unto any in
              particular, nor hurtful unto any in general; but
              I rather trust that the language and the plot
              which you shall find in each scene shall rather
              be commended and applauded than any way derided
              or scorned. In the action, which is the life of
              a comedy, and the glory of the author, it hath
              been sufficiently expressed to the liking of the
              spectators and commendations of the actors; who
              have set it forth in such lively colours, and to
              the meaning of the gentleman that true penned
              it, that I dare say few can excel them, though
              some may equal them. In the reading of one act
              you guess the consequence; for here is no
              bombasted or fustian stuff, but every line
              weighed as with balance, and every sentence
              placed with judgment and deliberation. All that
              you can find in the perusal I will give you
              notice of beforehand, to prevent a censure that
              may arise in thy reading of this comedy, as also
              for the excuse of the author; and that is this:
              here and there you shall find some lines that do
              answer in metre; which I hope will not prove so
              disdainful, whereby the book may be so much
              slighted as not to be read, or the author’s
              judgment undervalued as of no worth. Consider,
              gentle reader, it is full twenty years[722]
              since it was written, at which time metre was
              most in use, and shewed well upon the conclusion
              of every act and scene. My prevalent hope
              desires thy charitable censure, and thereby
              draws me to be

                                 Thy immutable friend,
                                                 J. S.[723]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.


                SIR BOUNTEOUS PROGRESS, _an old rich knight_.
                DICK FOLLYWIT, _his grandson_.
                HAREBRAIN.
                PENITENT BROTHEL.
                LIEUTENANT MAWWORM, }
                ANCIENT HOBOY, } _comrades to Follywit_.
                INESSE, }
                POSSIBILITY, } _two elder brothers_.
                GUMWATER, _Sir Bounteous’s chief man_.
                JASPER, _Penitent’s man_.
                RALPH, _Harebrain’s man_.
                SEMUS, _one of Sir Bounteous’s servants_.
                _Constable._
                _Watchmen._
                _Two Knights._
                _Companions of Follywit, Servants, &c._

                MISTRESS HAREBRAIN.
                FRANK GULLMAN, _a courtesan_.
                _Her Mother._
                _A Succubus._

                  Scene, partly LONDON, partly the COUNTRY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS.

                             --------------


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


                              _A Street._

            _Enter_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and others_.

          MAW. Captain, regent, principal!
          HOB. What shall I call thee? the noble spark of bounty!
        the life-blood of society!
          FOL. Call me your forecast, you whoresons! when you come
        drunk out of a tavern, ’tis I must cast your plots into
        form still; ’tis I must manage the prank, or I’ll not
        give a louse for the proceeding: I must let fly my civil
        fortunes, turn wild-brain, lay my wits upo’ th’ tenters,
        you rascals, to maintain a company of villains, whom I
        love in my very soul and conscience!
          MAW. Aha, our little forecast!
          FOL. Hang you, you have bewitched me among you! I was as
        well given[724] till I fell to be wicked! my grandsire
        had hope of me: I went all in black; swore but a’
        Sundays; never came home drunk but upon fasting-nights
        to cleanse my stomach. ’Slid, now I’m quite altered!
        blown into light colours; let out oaths by th’ minute;
        sit up late till it be early; drink drunk till I am
        sober; sink down dead in a tavern, and rise in a
        tobacco-shop: here’s a transformation! I was wont yet to
        pity the simple, and leave ’em some money: ’slid, now I
        gull ’em without conscience! I go without order, swear
        without number, gull without mercy, and drink without
        measure.
          MAW. I deny the last; for if you drink ne’er so much,
        you drink within measure.
          FOL. How prove you that, sir?
          MAW. Because the drawers never fill their pots.
          FOL. Mass, that was well found out! all drunkards may
        lawfully say, they drink within measure by that trick.
        And, now I’m put i’ th’ mind of a trick, can you keep
        your countenance, villains? Yet I am a fool to ask that;
        for how can they keep their countenance that have lost
        their credits?
          HOB. I warrant you for blushing, captain.
          FOL. I easily believe that, ancient, for thou lost thy
        colours once. Nay, faith, as for blushing, I think
        there’s grace little enough amongst you all; ’tis Lent
        in your cheeks, the flag’s down.[725] Well, your
        blushing face I suspect not, nor indeed greatly your
        laughing face, unless you had more money in your
        purses. Then thus compendiously now. You all know the
        possibilities of my hereafter fortunes, and the humour
        of my frolic grandsire, Sir Bounteous Progress, whose
        death makes all possible to me: I shall have all, when
        he has nothing; but now he has all, I shall have
        nothing. I think one mind runs through a million of
        ’em; they love to keep us sober all the while they’re
        alive, that when they’re dead we may drink to their
        healths; they cannot abide to see us merry all the
        while they’re above ground, and that makes so many
        laugh at their fathers’ funerals. I know my grandsire
        has his will in a box, and has bequeathed all to me,
        when he can carry nothing away; but stood I in need of
        poor ten pounds now, by his will I should hang myself
        ere I should get it: there’s no such word in his will,
        I warrant you, nor no such thought in his mind.
          MAW. You may build upon that, captain.
          FOL. Then since he has no will to do me good as long as
        he lives, by mine own will I’ll do myself good before he
        dies; and now I arrive at the purpose. You are not
        ignorant, I’m sure, you true and necessary implements of
        mischief, first, that my grandsire, Sir Bounteous
        Progress, is a knight of thousands, and therefore no
        knight since one thousand six hundred;[726] next, that
        he keeps a house like his name, bounteous, open for all
        comers; thirdly and lastly, that he stands much upon the
        glory of his complement,[727] variety of entertainment,
        together with the largeness of his kitchen, longitude of
        his buttery, and fecundity of his larder; and thinks
        himself never happier than when some stiff lord or great
        countess alights to make light his dishes. These being
        well mixed together, may give my project better
        encouragement, and make my purpose spring forth more
        fortunate: to be short, and cut off a great deal of
        dirty way, I’ll down to my grandsire like a lord.
          MAW. How, captain?
          FOL. A French ruff, a thin beard, and a strong perfume
        will do’t. I can hire blue coats[728] for you all by
        Westminster clock, and that colour will be soonest
        believed.
          MAW. But prithee, captain——
          FOL. Push,[729] I reach past your fathoms:[730] you
        desire crowns?
          MAW. From the crown of our head to the sole of our foot,
        bully.
          FOL. Why carry yourselves but probably, and carry away
        enough with yourselves.

                       _Enter_ PENITENT BROTHEL.

          HOB. Why, there spoke a Roman captain!—Master Penitent
        Brothel!
          P. BRO. Sweet master Folly-wit! [_Exeunt_ FOLLYWIT,
        MAWWORM, HOBOY, &c.] Here’s a mad-brain a’ th’
        first,[731] whose pranks scorn to have precedents, to be
        second to any, or walk beneath any madcap’s inventions;
        has played more tricks than the cards can allow a man,
        and of the last stamp too, hating imitation; a fellow,
        whose only glory is to be prime of the company; to be
        sure of which, he maintains all the rest: he’s the
        carrion, and they the kites that gorge upon him.
        But why in others do I check wild passions,
        And retain deadly follies in myself?
        I tax his youth of common receiv’d riot,
        Time’s comic flashes, and the fruits of blood;
        And in myself soothe up adulterous motions,
        And such an appetite that I know damns me,
        Yet willingly embrace it—love to Harebrain’s wife,
        Over whose hours and pleasures her sick husband,
        With a fantastic but deserv’d suspect,
        Bestows his serious time in watch and ward;
        And therefore I’m constrain’d to use the means
        Of one that knows no mean, a courtesan,
        One poison for another, whom her husband,
        Without suspicion, innocently admits
        Into her company, who with tried art
        Corrupts and loosens her most constant powers,
        Making his jealousy more than half a wittol,[732]
        Before his face plotting his own abuse,
        To which himself gives aim,[733]
        Whilst the broad arrow with the forked head
        Misses his brow but narrowly. See, here she comes,
        The close courtesan, whose mother is her bawd.

                           _Enter Courtesan._

          COUR. Master Penitent Brothel!—
          P. BRO. My little pretty lady Gullman, the news, the
        comfort?
          COUR. You’re the fortunate man, sir, knight a’ th’
        holland shirt;[734] there wants but opportunity, and
        she’s wax of your own fashioning. She had wrought
        herself into the form of your love before my art set
        finger to her.
            P. BRO. Did our affections meet? our thoughts keep
             time?
          COUR. So it should seem by the music: the only jar is in
        the grumbling bass-viol her husband.
          P. BRO. O, his waking suspicion!
          COUR. Sigh not, master Penitent; trust the managing of
        the business with me, ’tis for my credit now to see’t
        well finished: if I do you no good, sir, you shall give
        me no money, sir.
          P. BRO. I am arrived at the court of conscience; a
        courtesan! O admirable times! honesty is removed to the
        common place.[735] [_Aside._] Farewell, lady.
                                                       [_Exit._

                            _Enter Mother._

          MOT. How now, daughter?
          COUR. What news, mother?
          MOT. A token from thy keeper.
          COUR. O, from Sir Bounteous Progress: he’s my keeper
        indeed; but there’s many a piece of venison stolen that
        my keeper wots not on. There’s no park kept so warily
        but loses flesh one time or other; and no woman kept so
        privately but may watch advantage to make the best of
        her pleasure; and in common reason one keeper cannot be
        enough for so proud a park as a woman.
          MOT. Hold thee there, girl.
          COUR. Fear not me, mother.
          MOT. Every part of the world shoots up daily into more
        subtlety; the very spider weaves her cauls with more art
        and cunning to entrap the fly.
        The shallow ploughman can distinguish now
        ’Twixt simple truth and a dissembling brow;
        Your base mechanic fellow can spy out
        A weakness in a lord, and learns to flout.
        How does’t behove us then that live by slight,[736]
        To have our wits wound up to their stretch’d height!
        Fifteen times
        Thou knowest I have sold thy maidenhead
        To make up a dowry for thy marriage, and yet
        There’s maidenhead enough for old sir Bounteous still:
        He’ll be all his lifetime about it yet,
        And be as far to seek when he has done.
        The sums that I have told upon thy pillow!
        I shall once see those golden days again:
        Though fifteen, all thy maidenheads are not gone.
        Th’ Italian is not serv’d yet, nor the French:
        The British men come for a dozen at once,
        They engross all the market: tut, my girl,
        ’Tis nothing but a politic conveyance,
        A sincere carriage, a religious eyebrow,
        That throw[737] their charms over the worldling’s
           senses;
        And when thou spiest a fool that truly pities
        The false springs of thine eyes,
        And honourably doats upon thy love,
        If he be rich, set him by for a husband.
        Be wisely temper’d, and learn this, my wench,
        Who gets th’ opinion[738] for a virtuous name
        May sin at pleasure, and ne’er think of shame.
          COUR. Mother, I am too deep a scholar grown
        To learn my first rules now.
          MOT. ’Twill be thy own;
        I say no more: peace, hark! remove thyself.
        O, the two elder brothers!           [_Exit Courtesan._

                   _Enter_ INESSE _and_ POSSIBILITY.

          POS. A fair hour, sweet lady!
          MOT. Good morrow, gentlemen, master Inesse and master
        Possibility.
          IN. Where’s the little sweet lady your daughter?
          MOT. Even at her book, sir.
          POS. So religious?
          MOT. ’Tis no new motion, sir; sh’as took it from an
        infant.
          POS. May we deserve a sight of her, lady?
          MOT. Upon that condition you will promise me, gentlemen,
        to avoid all profane talk, wanton compliments, undecent
        phrases, and lascivious courtings (which I know my
        daughter will sooner die than endure), I am contented
        your suits shall be granted.
          POS. Not a bawdy syllable, I protest.
          IN. Syllable was [well] placed there; for indeed your
        one syllables are your bawdiest words: prick that down.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                     _Before_ HAREBRAIN’S _House_.

                           _Enter_ HAREBRAIN.

          HAR. She may make night-work on’t; ’twas well
           recover’d;[739]
        He-cats and courtesans stroll most i’ th’ night:
        Her friend may be receiv’d and convey’d forth nightly;
        I’ll be at charge
        For watch and ward, for watch and ward, i’faith;
        And here they come.

                           _Enter Watchmen._
          FIRST W. Give your worship good even.
          HAR. Welcome, my friends; I must deserve your
             diligence
        In an employment serious. The troth is,
        There’s[740] a cunning plot laid, but happily
           discover’d,
        To rob my house; the night uncertain when,
        But fix’d within the circle of this month;
        Nor does this villany consist in numbers,
        Or many partners; only some one
        Shall, in the form of my familiar friend,
        Be receiv’d privately into my house
        By some perfidious servant of mine own,
        Address’d fit for the practice.
          FIRST W. O abominable!
          HAR. If you be faithful watchmen, shew your goodness,
        And with these angels[741] shore up your eyelids:
                                               [_Giving money._

        Let me not be purloin’d—purloin’d indeed!
        The merry Greeks conceive me—there’s[742] a gem
        I would not lose,
        Kept by th’ Italian under lock and key:
        We Englishmen are careless creatures: well,
        I have said enough.
          SEC. W. And we will do enough, sir.
          HAR. Why, well said; watch me a good turn now; so, so,
             so.                            [_Exeunt Watchmen._
        Rise villany with the lark, why, ’tis prevented;
        Or steal’t by with the leather-winged bat,[743]
        The evening cannot save it—peace—

                           _Enter Courtesan._

        O, lady Gullman, my wife’s only company, welcome! and
        how does the virtuous matron, that good old gentlewoman,
        thy mother? I persuade myself, if modesty be in the
        world, she has part on’t; a woman of an excellent
        carriage all her lifetime, in court, city, and country.
          COUR. Sh’as always carried it well in those places,
        sir;—witness three bastards a-piece. [_Aside_]—How does
        your sweet bed-fellow, sir? you see I’m her boldest
        visitant.
          HAR. And welcome, sweet virgin; the only companion my
        soul wishes for her. I left her within at her lute;
        prithee, give her good counsel.
          COUR. Alas, she needs none, sir!
          HAR. Yet, yet, yet, a little of thy instructions will
        not come amiss to her.
          COUR. I’ll bestow my labour, sir.
          HAR. Do, labour her, prithee. I have conveyed away all
        her wanton pamphlets; as _Hero and Leander_, _Venus and
        Adonis_;[744] O, two luscious marrow-bone pies for a
        young married wife! Here, here, prithee, take the
        _Resolution_,[745] and read to her a little.
                                                 [_Gives book._
          COUR. Sh’as set up her resolution already, sir.
          HAR. True, true, and this will confirm it the more:
        there’s a chapter of hell; ’tis good to read this cold
        weather: terrify her, terrify her. Go, read to her the
        horrible punishments for itching wantonness, the pains
        allotted for adultery; tell her her thoughts, her very
        dreams are answerable, say so; rip up the life of a
        courtesan, and shew how loathsome ’tis.
          COUR. The gentleman would persuade me in time to
        disgrace myself, and speak ill of mine own function.
                                             [_Aside and exit._
          HAR. This is the course I take; I’ll teach the married
             man
        A new-selected strain. I admit none
        But this pure virgin to her company:
        Pooh, that’s enough; I’ll keep her to her stint,
        I’ll put her to her pension;
        She gets but her allowance, that’s [a] bare one:
        Few women but have that beside their own:
        Ha, ha, ha! nay, I will[746] put her hard to’t.

              _Enter_ MISTRESS HAREBRAIN _and Courtesan_.

          MIS. H. Fain would I meet the gentleman.
          COUR. Push,[747] fain would you meet him! why, you do
        not take the course.
          HAR. How earnestly she labours her,
        Like a good wholesome sister of the Family![748]
        She will prevail, I hope.                     [_Aside._
          COUR. Is that the means?
          MIS. H. What is the means?
        I would as gladly, to enjoy his sight,
        Embrace it as the——
          COUR. Shall I have hearing? listen.
          HAR. She’s round with her, i’faith.[749]    [_Aside._
          COUR. When husbands in their rank’st suspicions dwell,
        Then ’tis our best art to dissemble well:
        Put but these notes in use that I’ll direct you,
        He’ll curse himself that e’er he did suspect you.
        Perhaps he will solicit you, as in trial,
        To visit such and such; still give denial:
        Let no persuasions sway you; they’re[750] but fetches
        Set to betray you, jealousies, slights,[751] and
           reaches.
        Seem in his sight t’ endure the sight of no man;
        Put by all kisses, till you kiss in common:
        Neglect all entertain; if he bring in
        Strangers, keep you your chamber, be not seen.
        If he chance steal upon you, let him find
        Some book lie open ’gainst an unchaste mind,
        And coted[752] Scriptures; though for your own pleasure
        You read some stirring pamphlet, and convey it
        Under your skirt, the fittest place to lay it.
        This is the course, my wench, t’ enjoy thy wishes;
        Here you perform best when you most neglect:
        The way to daunt is to outvie suspect.
        Manage these principles but with art and life,
        Welcome all nations, thou’rt an honest wife.
          HAR. She puts it home, i’faith, even to the quick:
        From her elaborate action I reach that.
        I must requite this maid; faith, I’m forgetful.
                                                      [_Aside._
          MIS. H. Here, lady,
        Convey my heart unto him in this jewel.
        Against you see me next, you shall perceive
        I’ve[753] profited; in the mean season tell him
        I am a prisoner yet a’ th’ Master’s side,[754]
        My husband’s jealousy,
        That masters him, as he doth master me;
        And as a keeper that locks prisoners up
        Is himself prison’d under his own key,
        Even so my husband, in restraining me,
        With the same ward bars his own liberty.
          COUR. I’ll tell him how you wish it, and I’ll wear
        My wits to the third pile[755] but all shall clear.
          MIS. H. I owe you more than thanks, but that I hope
        My husband will requite you.
          COUR. Think you so, lady? he has small reason for’t.
          HAR. What, done so soon? away, to’t again, to’t again,
        good wench, to’t again; leave her not so: where left
        you? come.
          COUR. Faith, I am weary, sir.
        I cannot draw her from her strict opinion
        With all the arguments that sense can frame.
          HAR. No? let me come.—Fie, wife, you must consent.—What
        opinion is’t? let’s hear.
          COUR. Fondly[756] and wilfully she retains that
             thought,
        That every sin is damn’d.
          HAR. O, fie, fie, wife! pea, pea, pea, pea, how have you
        lost your time! for shame, be converted. There’s a
        diabolical opinion indeed! then you may think that usury
        were damned; you’re a fine merchant, i’faith! or
        bribery; you know the law well! or sloth; would some of
        the clergy heard you, i’faith! or pride; you come at
        court! or gluttony; you’re not worthy to dine at an
        alderman’s table!
        Your only deadly sin’s adultery,
        That villanous ringworm, woman’s worst requital;
        ’Tis only lechery that’s damn’d to th’ pit-hole:
        Ah, that’s an arch offence, believe it, squal!
        All sins are venial but venereal.
          COUR. I’ve said enough to her.
          HAR. And she will be rul’d by you.
          COUR. Faugh!
          HAR. I’ll pawn my credit on’t. Come hither, lady,
        I will not altogether rest ingrateful;
        Here, wear this ruby for thy pains and counsel.
          COUR. It is not so much worth, sir; I am a very ill
        counsellor, truly.
          HAR. Go to, I say.
          COUR. You’re to blame, i’faith, sir; I shall ne’er
             deserve it.
          HAR. Thou hast done’t already: farewell, sweet virgin;
        prithee, let’s see thee oftener.
          COUR. Such gifts will soon entreat me.
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          HAR. Wife, as thou lov’st the quiet of my breast,
        Embrace her counsel, yield to her advices:
        Thou wilt find comfort in ’em in the end;
        Thou’lt feel an alteration: prithee, think on’t:
        Mine eyes can scarce refrain.
          MIS. H. Keep in your dew, sir,
        Lest when you would, you want it.
          HAR. I’ve pawn’d my credit on’t: ah, didst thou know
        The sweet fruit once, thou’dst never let it go!
          MIS. H. ’Tis that I strive to get.
          HAR. And still do so.                      [_Exeunt._


                            ACT II. SCENE I.


         _A Hall in_ SIR BOUNTEOUS PROGRESS’S _Country House_.

           _Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS PROGRESS _and two Knights_.

            FIRST K. You have been too much like your name, sir
             Bounteous.
          SIR B. O, not so, good knights, not so; you know my
        humour: most welcome, good sir Andrew Pollcut;[757] sir
        Aquitain Colewort, most welcome.
          BOTH. Thanks, good sir Bounteous.
                                         [_Exeunt at one door._

         _At the other door, enter in haste one of_ FOLLYWIT’S
                  _companions disguised as a Footman_.

          FOOT. O, cry your worship heartily mercy, sir!
          SIR B. How now, linen stockings and threescore mile
        a-day? whose footman art thou?
          FOOT. Pray, can your worship tell me—ho, ho, ho!—if my
        lord be come in yet.
          SIR B. Thy lord! what lord?
          FOOT. My lord Owemuch, sir.
          SIR B. My lord Owemuch? I have heard much speech of that
        lord; has great acquaintance i’ th’ city; that lord has
        been much followed.
          FOOT. And is still, sir; he wants no company when he’s
        in London: he’s free of the mercers, and there’s none of
        ’em all dare cross him.
          SIR B. And[758] they did, he’d turn over a new leaf with
        ’em; he would make ’em all weary on’t i’ th’ end. Much
        fine rumour have I heard of that lord, yet had I never
        the fortune to set eye upon him: art sure he will alight
        here, footman? I am afraid thou’rt mistook.

          FOOT. Thinks your worship so, sir? by your leave, sir.
                  [_Going._
          SIR B. Pooh, passion of me, footman! why, pumps, I say,
        come back!
          FOOT. Does your worship call?
          SIR B. Come hither, I say. I am but afraid on’t; would
        it might happen so well! How dost know? did he name the
        house with the great turret a’ th’ top?
          FOOT. No, faith, did he not, sir.           [_Going._
          SIR B. Come hither, I say. Did he speak of a
        cloth-a’-gold chamber?
          FOOT. Not one word, by my troth, sir.       [_Going._
          SIR B. Come again, you lousy seven-mile-an-hour!
          FOOT. I beseech your worship, detain me not.
          SIR B. Was there no talk of a fair pair of organs,[759]
        a great gilt candlestick, and a pair of silver snuffers?
          FOOT. ’Twere sin to belie my lord; I heard no such
        words, sir.
                                                      [_Going._
          SIR B. A pox confine thee! come again, pooh!
          FOOT. Your worship will undo me, sir.
          SIR B. Was there no speech of a long dining-room, a huge
        kitchen, large meat, and a broad dresser-board?
          FOOT. I have a greater maw to that indeed, an’t please
        your worship.
          SIR B. Whom did he name?
          FOOT. Why, one sir Bounteous Progress.
          SIR B. Ah, a, a! I am that sir Bounteous, you
        progressive round-about rascal.
          FOOT. Pooh!                           [_Laughs._[760]
          SIR B. I knew I should have him i’ th’ end: there’s not
        a lord will miss me, I thank their good honours; ’tis a
        fortune laid upon me; they can scent out their best
        entertainment. I have a kind of complimental gift given
        me above ordinary country knights; and how soon ’tis
        smelt out! I warrant ye, there’s not one knight i’ th’
        shire able to entertain a lord i’ th’ cue, or a lady i’
        th’ nick, like me;—like me! there’s a kind of grace
        belongs to’t, a kind of art which naturally slips from
        me; I know not on’t, I promise you, ’tis gone before I’m
        aware on’t—cuds me, I forget myself—where——

                           _Enter Servants._

          FIRST S. Does your worship call?
          SIR B. Run, sirrah! call in my chief gentleman i’ th’
        chain of gold;[761] expedite. [_Exit First Servant._]—
        And how does my good lord? I never saw him before in my
        life.—A cup of bastard[762] for this footman!
          FOOT. My lord has travelled this five year, sir.
          SIR B. Travelled this five year? how many children has
        he?—Some bastard, I say!
          FOOT. No bastard, an’t please your worship.
          SIR B. A cup of sack to strengthen his wit!—
             [_Exit Second Servant, and returns with the wine._

        The footman’s a fool.

                           _Enter_ GUMWATER.

        O, come hither, master Gumwater, come hither: send
        presently to master Pheasant for one of his hens;
        there’s partridge i’ th’ house?
          GUM. And wild-duck, an’t please your worship.
          SIR B. And woodcock, an’t please thy worship.
          GUM. And woodcock, an’t please your worship.—I had
        thought to have spoke before you.
          SIR B. Remember the pheasant, down with some plover,
        clap down six woodcocks; my lord’s[763] coming: now,
        sir.
          GUM. An’t please your worship, there’s a lord and his
        followers newly alighted.
          SIR B. Despatch, I say, despatch: why, where’s my music?
        he’s come indeed.                     [_Exit_ GUMWATER.

          _Enter_ FOLLYWIT _dressed as a lord, with_ MAWWORM,
                HOBOY, _and others, in blue coats_.[764]

          FOL. Footman!
          FOOT. My lord?
          FOL. Run swiftly with my commendations to sir Jasper
        Topaz: we’ll ride and visit him i’ th’ morning, say.
          FOOT. Your lordship’s charge shall be effected.
                                                       [_Exit._
          FOL. That courtly, comely form should present to me
        Sir Bounteous Progress.
          SIR B. You’ve found me out, my lord; I cannot hide
             myself:
        Your honour is most spaciously welcome.
          FOL. In this forgive me, sir,
        That being a stranger to your house[765] and you,
        I make my way so bold; and presume
        Rather upon your kindness than your knowledge;
        Only your bounteous disposition
        Fame hath divulg’d, and is to me well known.
          SIR B. Nay, and your lordship know my disposition, you
        know me better than they that know my person; your
        honour is so much the welcomer for that.
          FOL. Thanks, good sir Bounteous.
          SIR B. Pray, pardon me; it has been often my ambition,
        my lord, both in respect of your honourable presence,
        and the prodigal fame that keeps even stroke with your
        unbounded worthiness,
        To have wish’d your lordship where your lordship is,
        A noble guest in this unworthy seat:
        Your lordship ne’er heard my organs?
          FOL. Heard of ’em, sir Bounteous, but never heard ’em.
          SIR B. They’re but double-gilt, my lord; some hundred
        and fifty pound will fit your lordship with such another
        pair.[766]
          FOL. Indeed, sir Bounteous!
          SIR B. O, my lord, I have a present suit to you!
          FOL. To me, sir Bounteous? and you could ne’er speak at
        fitter time, for I’m here present to grant you.
          SIR B. Your lordship has been a traveller?
          FOL. Some five year, sir.
          SIR B. I have a grandchild, my lord; I love him; and
        when I die I’ll do somewhat for him: I’ll tell your
        honour the worst of him, a wild lad he has been.
          FOL. So we have been all, sir.
          SIR B. So we have been all indeed, my lord; I thank your
        lordship’s assistance. Some comic pranks he has been
        guilty of; but I’ll pawn my credit for him, an honest,
        trusty bosom.
          FOL. And that’s worth all, sir.
          SIR B. And that’s worth all indeed, my lord, for he’s
        like to have all when I die: _imberbis juvenis_, his
        chin has no more prickles yet than a midwife’s; there’s
        great hope of his wit, his hair’s so long a-coming.
        Shall I be bold with your honour, to prefer this
        aforesaid Ganymede to hold a plate under your lordship’s
        cup?
          FOL. You wrong both his worth and your bounty, and[767]
        you call that boldness. Sir, I have heard much good of
        that young gentleman.
          SIR B. Nay, has a good wit, i’faith, my lord.
          FOL. Has carried himself always generously.
          SIR B. Are you advised of that, my lord? has carried
        many things cleanly. I’ll shew your lordship my will; I
        keep it above in an outlandish box; the whoreson boy
        must have all: I love him, yet he shall ne’er find it as
        long as I live.
          FOL. Well, sir, for your sake, and his own deserving,
        I’ll reserve a place for him nearest to my secrets.
          SIR B. I understand your good lordship; you’ll make him
        your secretary.—My music! give my lord a taste of his
        welcome. [_A strain played by the consort_:[768] SIR
        BOUNTEOUS _makes a courtly honour to_ FOLLYWIT, _and
        seems to foot the tune_.] So.—How like you our airs, my
        lord? are they choice?
          FOL. They’re seldom matched, believe it.
          SIR B. The consort of mine own household.
          FOL. Yea, sir!
          SIR B. The musicians are in ordinary, yet no ordinary
        musicians. Your lordship shall hear my organs now.
          FOL. O, I beseech you, sir Bounteous!
          SIR B. My organist! [_The organs play, and servants with
        covered dishes pass over the stage._]—Come, my lord, how
        does your honour relish my organ[s]?
          FOL. A very proud air, i’faith, sir.
          SIR B. O, how can’t choose? a Walloon plays upon ’em,
        and a Welchman blows wind in their breech.    [_Exeunt._
                                  [_A song to the organs._[769]


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Gallery._

        _Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS, _with_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY,
                           _and others_.[770]

          SIR B. You must pardon us, my lord, hasty cates; your
        honour has had even a hunting-meal on’t; and now I am
        like to bring your lordship to as mean a lodging; a hard
        down bed, i’faith, my lord, poor cambric sheets, and a
        cloth a’ tissue canopy; the curtains, indeed, were
        wrought in Venice, with the story of the Prodigal Child
        in silk and gold; only the swine are left out, my lord,
        for[771] spoiling the curtains.
          FOL. ’Twas well prevented, sir.
          SIR B. Silken rest, harmonious slumbers, and venereal
        dreams to your lordship!
          FOL. The like to kind sir Bounteous!
          SIR B. Fie, not to me, my lord; I’m old, past dreaming
        of such vanities.
          FOL. Old men should dream best.
          SIR B. They’re dreame[r]s indeed, my lord; you’ve gi’nt
        us. To-morrow your lordship shall see my cocks, my
        fish-ponds, my park, my champion[772] grounds; I keep
        champers[773] in my house can shew your lordship some
        pleasure.
          FOL. Sir Bounteous, you even whelm me with
        delights.
          SIR B. Once again, a musical night to your honour! I’ll
        trouble your lordship no more.
          FOL. Good rest, sir Bounteous. [_Exit_ SIR BOUNTEOUS.]—
        So, come, the vizards! where be the masking-suits?
          MAW. In your lordship’s portmantua.
          FOL. Peace, lieutenant.
          MAW. I had rather have war, captain.
          FOL. Pooh, the plot’s ripe! come, to our business,
             lad;
        Though guilt condemns, ’tis gilt[774] must make us glad.
          MAW. Nay, and[775] you be at your distinctions, captain,
        I’ll follow behind no longer.
          FOL. Get you before, then, and whelm your nose with your
        vizard; go.                            [_Exit_ MAWWORM.
        Now, grandsire, you that hold me at hard meat,
        And keep me out at the dag’s end,[776] I’ll fit you:
        Under his lordship’s leave, all must be mine
        He and his will confesses; what I take, then,
        Is but a borrowing of so much beforehand;
        I’ll pay him again when he dies in so many blacks;[777]

        I’ll have the church hung round with a noble[778] a
        yard, or requite him in scutcheons: let him trap me in
        gold, and I’ll lap him in lead; _quid pro quo_. I must
        look none of his angels[779] in the face, forsooth,
        until his face be not worth looking on: tut, lads,

        Let sires and grandsires keep us low, we must
        Live when they’re flesh, as well as when they’re dust.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                   _A Room in the Courtesan’s House._

                     _Enter Courtesan and Servant._

          COUR. Go, sirrah, run presently to master Penitent
        Brothel; you know his lodging; knock him up; I know he
        cannot sleep for sighing;
        Tell him, I’ve happily bethought a mean
        To make his purpose prosper in each limb,
        Which only rests to be approv’d by him:
        Make haste, I know he thirsts for’t.
                                           [_Exeunt severally._


                               SCENE IV.


                              _A Gallery._

         _Enter_ FOLLYWIT _in a masking suit, with a vizard in
                               his hand_.

          [_Within_] Oh!
          FOL. Hark! they’re at their business.
          [_Within_] Thieves, thieves!
          FOL. Gag that gaping rascal! though he be my grandsire’s
        chief gentleman i’ th’ chain of gold,[780] I’ll have no
        pity of him.

            _Enter_ MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and others, vizarded_.

        How now, lads?
          MAW. All’s sure and safe; on with your vizard, sir; the
        servants are all bound.
          FOL. There’s one care past then: come, follow me, lads;
        I’ll lead you now to th’ point and top of all your
        fortunes: yon lodging is my grandsire’s.
          MAW. So, so; lead on, on!
          HOB. Here’s a captain worth the following, and a wit
        worth a man’s love and admiring!         [_Exeunt._[781]


                                SCENE V.

        _A Room opening into_ SIR BOUNTEOUS’S _Bed-chamber, from
            which enter_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and others,
            dragging in_ SIR BOUNTEOUS _in his night-gown_.

          SIR B. O gentlemen, and[782] you be kind gentlemen,
        what countrymen are you?
          FOL. Lincolnshire men, sir.
          SIR B. I am glad of that, i’faith.
          FOL. And why should you be glad of that?
          SIR B. O, the honestest thieves of all come out of
        Lincolnshire, the kindest-natured gentlemen; they’ll rob
        a man with conscience; they have a feeling of what they
        go about, and will steal with tears in their eyes: ah,
        pitiful gentlemen!
          FOL. Push,[783] money, money! we come for money.
          SIR B. Is that all you come for? Ah, what a beast was I
        to put out my money t’other day! Alas, good gentlemen,
        what shift shall I make for you? pray, come again
        another time.
          FOL. Tut, tut, sir, money!
          SIR B. O not so loud, sir! you’re too shrill a
        gentleman: I have a lord lies in my house; I would not
        for the world his honour should be disquieted.
          FOL. Who, my lord Owemuch? we have took order with him
        beforehand; he lies bound in his bed, and all his
        followers.
          SIR B. Who, my lord? bound my lord? Alas, what did you
        mean to bind my lord? he could keep his bed well enough
        without binding. You’ve undone me in’t already, you need
        rob me no farther.
          FOL. Which is the key? come!
          SIR B. Ah, I perceive now you’re no true Lincolnshire
        spirits! you come rather out of Bedfordshire; we cannot
        lie quiet in our beds for you. So, take enough, my
        masters [_they rifle his cabinets_]: spur a free horse,
        my name’s sir Bounteous; a merry world, i’faith; what
        knight but I keep open house at midnight? Well, there
        should be a conscience, if one could hit upon’t.
          FOL. Away now; seize upon him, bind him.
          SIR B. Is this your court of equity? why should I be
        bound for mine own money? but come, come, bind me, I
        have need on’t; I have been too liberal to-night, keep
        in my hands [_they bind him_]: nay, as hard as you list;
        I am too good to bear my lord company. You have watched
        your time, my masters; I was knighted at Westminster,
        but many of these nights will make me a knight of
        Windsor.[784] You’ve deserved so well, my masters, I bid
        you all to dinner to-morrow: I would I might have your
        companies, i’faith; I desire no more.
          FOL. O, ho, sir!
          SIR B. Pray, meddle not with my organs, to put ’em out
        of tune.
          FOL. O no, here’s better music, sir.
          SIR B. Ah, pox feast you!
          FOL. Despatch with him, away! [_Exeunt_ HOBOY _and
        others, carrying_ SIR BOUNTEOUS _into the
        bed-chamber_.]—So, thank you, good grandsire! This was
        bounteously done of him, i’faith: it came somewhat hard
        from him at first; for, indeed, nothing comes stiff from
        an old man but money; and he may well stand upon that,
        when he has nothing else to stand upon. Where’s our
        portmantua?
          MAW. Here, bully captain.
          FOL. In with the purchase,[785] ’twill lie safe enough
        there under ’s nose, I warrant you.—

                     _Re-enter_ HOBOY _and others_.

        What, is all sure?
          HOB. All’s sure, captain.
          FOL. You know what follows now, one villain binds
        his fellows; go, we must be all bound for our own
        securities, rascals. There’s no dallying upo’ th’
        point; you conceit me: there is a lord to be found
        bound in the morning, and all his followers; can you
        pick out that lord now?
          MAW. O admirable spirit!
          FOL. You ne’er plot for your safeties, so your wants be
        satisfied.
          HOB. But if we bind one another, how shall the last man
        be bound?
          FOL. Pox on’t, I’ll have the footman ’scape.
          FOOT. That’s I; I thank you, sir.
          FOL. The footman, of all other, will be supposed to
        ’scape, for he comes in no bed all night, but lies in ’s
        clothes, to be first ready i’ th’ morning; the horse and
        he lie[786] in litter together, that’s the right fashion
        of your bonny footman; and his freedom will make the
        better for our purpose, for we must have one i’ th’
        morning to unbind the knight, that we may have our sport
        within ourselves. We now arrive at the most ticklish
        point, to rob, and take our ease, to be thieves, and lie
        by’t: look to’t, lads, it concerns every man’s gullet;
        I’ll not have the jest spoiled, that’s certain, though
        it hazard a windpipe. I’ll either go like a lord as I
        came, or be hanged like a thief as I am; and that’s my
        resolution.
          MAW. Troth, a match, captain, of all hands!
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE VI.


                   _A Room in the Courtesan’s House._

              _Enter Courtesan meeting_ PENITENT BROTHEL.

          COUR. O master Penitent Brothel!
          PEN. B. What is’t, sweet lady Gullman, that so seizes on
        thee with rapture and admiration?
          COUR. A thought, a trick, to make you, sir, especially
        happy, and yet I myself a saver by it.
          PEN. B. I would embrace that, lady, with such courage,
        I would not leave you on the losing hand.
          COUR. I will give trust to you, sir. The cause, then,
        why I raised you from your bed so soon, wherein I know
        sighs would not let you sleep, thus understand it:
        You love that woman, master Harebrain’s wife,
        Which no invented means can crown with freedom
        For your desires and her own wish but this,
        Which in my slumbers did present itself.
          PEN. B. I’m covetous, lady.
          COUR. You know her husband, lingering in suspect,
        Locks her from all society but mine.
          PEN. B. Most true.
          COUR. I only am admitted; yet hitherto that has done you
        no real happiness; by my admittance I cannot perform
        that deed that should please you, you know: wherefore
        thus I’ve conveyed it, I’ll counterfeit a fit of violent
        sickness.
          PEN. B. Good.
          COUR. Nay, ’tis not so good, by my faith, but to do you
        good.
          PEN. B. And in that sense I called it: but take me with
        you, lady;[787] would it be probable enough to have a
        sickness so suddenly violent?
          COUR. Pooh, all the world knows women are soon down: we
        can be sick when we have a mind to’t, catch an ague with
        the wind of our fans, surfeit upon the rump of a lark,
        and bestow ten pound in physic upon’t: we’re likest
        ourselves when we’re down; ’tis the easiest art and
        cunning for our sect[788] to counterfeit sick, that are
        always full of fits when we are well; for since we were
        made for a weak, imperfect creature, we can fit that
        best that we are made for. I thus translated, and
        yourself slipt into the form of a physician——
          PEN. B. I a physician, lady? talk not on’t, I beseech
        you; I shall shame the whole college.
          COUR. Tut, man, any quacksalving terms will serve for
        this purpose; for I am pitifully haunted with a brace of
        elder brothers, new perfumed in the first of their
        fortunes, and I shall see how forward their purses will
        be to the pleasing of my palate, and restoring of my
        health. Lay on load enough upon ’em, and spare ’em not,
        for they’re good plump fleshly asses, and may well
        enough bear it; let gold,[789] amber, and dissolved
        pearl, be common ingrediences, and that you cannot
        compose a cullice without ’em. Put but this cunningly in
        practice, it shall be both a sufficient recompense for
        all my pains in your love, and the ready means to make
        mistress Harebrain way, by the visiting of me, to your
        mutual desired company.
          PEN. B. I applaud thee, kiss thee, and will constantly
        embrace it.                        [_Exeunt severally._


                               SCENE VII.


              _A Bed-chamber_: FOLLYWIT, _bound, in bed_.

          SIR B. [_within_] Ho, Gumwater!
          FOL. Singlestone!
          [_Within_] Jenkin, wa, ha, ho!
          [_Within_] Ewen!
          [_Within_] Simcod!
          FOL. Footman! whew!
          FOOT. [_within_] O good your worship, let me help your
        good old worship!

         _Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS, _with a cord half unbound, and
                 Footman,[790] assisting to loose him_.

          SIR B. Ah, poor honest footman! how did’st thou ’scape
        this massacre?
          FOOT. E’en by miracle, and lying in my clothes, sir.
          SIR B. I think so; I would I had lain in my clothes too,
        footman, so I had ’scaped ’em: I could have but
        risse[791] like a beggar then, and so I do now, till
        more money come in; but nothing afflicts me so much, my
        poor geometrical footman, as that the barbarous villains
        should lay violence upon my lord. Ah, the binding of my
        lord cuts my heart in two pieces! So, so, ’tis well; I
        thank thee: run to thy fellows; undo ’em, undo ’em, undo
        ’em!
          FOOT. Alas, if my lord should miscarry, they’re unbound
        already, sir; they have no occupation but sleep, feed,
        and fart.                                      [_Exit._
          SIR B. If I be not ashamed to look my lord i’ th’ face,
        I’m a Saracen.—My lord!
          FOL. Who’s that?
          SIR B. One may see he has been scared: a pox on ’em for
        their labours!
          FOL. Singlestone!
          SIR B. Singlestone? I’ll ne’er answer to that, i’faith.
          FOL. Suchman!
          SIR B. Suchman? nor that neither, i’faith; I am not
        brought so low, though I be old.
          FOL. Who’s that i’ th’ chamber?
          SIR B. Good morrow, my lord; ’tis I.
          FOL. Sir Bounteous, good morrow; I would give you my
        hand, sir, but I cannot come at it. Is this the courtesy
        a’ th’ country, sir Bounteous?
          SIR B. Your lordship grieves me more than all my loss;
        ’Tis the unnatural’st sight that can be found,
        To see a noble gentleman hard bound.
          FOL. Trust me, I thought you had been better beloved,
        sir Bounteous; but I see you have enemies, sir, and your
        friends fare the worse for ’em. I like your talk better
        than your lodging; I ne’er lay harder in a bed of down;
        I have had a mad night’s rest on’t. Can you not guess
        what they should be, sir Bounteous?
          SIR B. Faith, Lincolnshire men, my lord.
          FOL. How? fie, fie, believe it not, sir; these lie not
        far off, I warrant you.
          SIR B. Think you so, my lord?
          FOL. I’ll be burnt and[792] they do; some that use
        to your house, sir, and are familiar with all the
        conveyances.
          SIR B. This is the commodity[793] of keeping open house,
        my lord; that makes so many shut their doors about
        dinner-time.
          FOL. They were resolute villains: I made myself known to
        ’em, told ’em what I was, gave ’em my honourable word
        not to disclose ’em—
          SIR B. O saucy, unmannerly villains!
          FOL. And think you the slaves would trust me upon my
        word?
          SIR B. They would not?
          FOL. Forsooth, no; I must pardon ’em: they told me
        lords’ promises were mortal, and commonly die within
        half an hour after they are spoken; they were but
        gristles, and not one amongst a hundred come to any full
        growth or perfection; and therefore, though I were a
        lord, I must enter into bond.
          SIR B. Insupportable rascals!
          FOL. Troth, I’m of that mind. Sir Bounteous, you fared
        the worse for my coming hither.
          SIR B. Ah, good my lord, but I’m sure your lordship
        fared the worse!
          FOL. Pray, pity not me, sir.
          SIR B. Is not your honour sore about the brawn of the
        arm? a murrain meet ’em, I feel it!
          FOL. About this place, sir Bounteous?
          SIR B. You feel as it were a twinge, my lord?
          FOL. Ay, e’en a twinge, you say right.
          SIR B. A pox discover ’em, that twinge I feel too!
          FOL. But that which disturbs me most, sir Bounteous,
        lies here.
          SIR B. True; about the wrist, a kind of tumid numbness.
          FOL. You say true, sir.
          SIR B. The reason of that, my lord, is, the pulses had
        no play.
          FOL. Mass, so I guessed it.
          SIR B. A mischief swell ’em, for I feel that too!

                            _Enter_ MAWWORM.

          MAW. ’Slid, here’s a house haunted indeed!
          SIR B. A word with you, sir.
          FOL. How now, Singlestone?
          MAW. I’m sorry, my lord, your lordship has lost——
          SIR B. Pup, pup, pup, pup, pup!
          FOL. What have I lost? speak.
          SIR B. A good night’s sleep, say.
          FOL. Speak, what have I lost, I say?
          MAW. A good night’s sleep, my lord, nothing else.
          FOL. That’s true; my clothes, come.
          MAW. My lord’s clothes! his honour’s rising.

        _Enter_[794] HOBOY _and others with clothes: they retire
         to_ FOLLYWIT, _behind the curtains, which are drawn_.
          SIR B. Hist, well said: come hither; what has my lord
        lost? tell me, speak softly.
          MAW. His lordship must know that, sir.
          SIR B. Hush! prithee tell me.
          MAW. ’Twill do you no pleasure to know’t, sir.
          SIR B. Yet again? I desire it, I say.
          MAW. Since your worship will needs know’t, they have
        stolen away a jewel in a blue silk ribband of a hundred
        pound price, beside some hundred pounds in fair
        spur-royals.[795]
          SIR B. That’s some two hundred i’ th’ total.
          MAW. Your worship’s much about it, sir.
          SIR B. Come, follow me; I’ll make that whole again in so
        much money; let not my lord know on’t.
          MAW. O pardon me, sir Bounteous! that were a dishonour
        to my lord: should it come to his ear, I should hazard
        my undoing by it.
          SIR B. How should it come to his ear? if you be my
        lord’s chief man about him, I hope you do not use to
        speak unless you be paid for’t; and I had rather give
        you a counsellor’s double fee to hold your peace. Come,
        go to; follow me, I say.
          MAW. There will be scarce time to tell it, sir; my lord
        will away instantly.
          SIR B. His honour shall stay dinner, by his leave; I’ll
        prevail with him so far: and now I remember a jest, I
        bade the whoreson thieves to dinner last night; I would
        I might have their companies; a pox poison ’em!
                                                       [_Exit._
          MAW. Faith, and you are like to have no other
        guess,[796] sir Bounteous, if you have none but us; I’ll
        give you that gift, i’faith.               [_Exit._[797]


                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                    _A Hall in_ HAREBRAIN’S _House_.

             _Enter_ HAREBRAIN, INESSE, _and_ POSSIBILITY.

          POS. You see bold guests, master Harebrain.
          HAR. You’re kindly welcome to my house, good master
        Inesse and master Possibility.
          IN. That’s our presumption, sir.
          HAR. Ralph!

                             _Enter_ RALPH.

          RAL. Here, sir.
          HAR. Call down your mistress to welcome these two
        gentlemen, my friends.
          RAL. I shall, sir.                           [_Exit._
          HAR. I will observe her carriage, and watch
        The slippery revolutions of her eye;
        I’ll lie in wait for every glance she gives,
        And poise her words i’ th’ balance of suspect:
        If she but swag,[798] she’s gone; either on this hand
        Over familiar, or this too neglectful:
        It does behove her carry herself even.        [_Aside._
          POS. But, master Harebrain——
          HAR. True, I hear you, sir; was’t you said?
          POS. I have not spoke it yet, sir.
          HAR. Right, so I say.
          POS. Is it not strange, that in so short a time my
        little lady Gullman should be so violently handled?
          HAR. O, sickness has no mercy, sir!
        It neither pities lady’s lip nor eye;
        It crops the rose out of the virgin’s cheek,
        And so deflowers her that was ne’er deflower’d.[799]
        Fools, then, are maids to lock from men that treasure
        Which death will pluck, and never yield ’em pleasure.
        Ah, gentlemen, though I shadow it, that sweet virgin’s
        sickness grieves me not lightly! she was my wife’s only
        delight and company. Did you not hear her, gentlemen, i’
        th’ midst of her extremest fit, still how she called
        upon my wife, remembered still my wife, sweet mistress
        Harebrain? When she sent for me, a’ one side of her bed
        stood the physician, the scrivener on the other; two
        horrible objects, but mere opposites in the course of
        their lives, for the scrivener binds folks, and the
        physician makes them loose.
          POS. But not loose of their bonds, sir.
          HAR. No, by my faith, sir, I say not so: if the
        physician could make ’em loose of their bonds, there’s
        many a one would take physic, that dares not now for
        poisoning. But, as I was telling of you, her will was
        fashioning, wherein I found her best and richest jewel
        given as a legacy unto my wife: when I read that, I
        could not refrain weeping. Well, of all other my wife
        has most reason to visit her; if she have any good
        nature in her, she’ll shew it there.—

                           _Re-enter_ RALPH.

        Now, sir, where’s your mistress?
          RAL. She desires you, and the gentlemen your friends, to
        hold her excused; sh’as a fit of an ague now upon her,
        which begins to shake her.
          HAR. Where does it shake her most?
          RAL. All over her body, sir.
          HAR. Shake all her body? ’tis a saucy fit, I’m jealous
        of that ague. [_Aside._]—Pray, walk in, gentlemen; I’ll
        see you instantly.  [_Exeunt_ INESSE _and_ POSSIBILITY.
          RAL. Now they are absent, sir, ’tis no such thing.
          HAR. What?
          RAL. My mistress has her health, sir,
        But ’tis her suit she may confine herself
        From sight of all men but your own dear self, sir;
        For since the sickness of that modest virgin,
        Her only company, she delights in none.
          HAR. No? visit her again, commend me to her,
        Tell her they’re gone, and only I myself
        Walk here t’ exchange a word or two with her.
          RAL. I’ll tell her so, sir.                            [_Exit._
          HAR. Fool that I am, and madman, beast! what worse?
        Suspicious o’er a creature that deserves
        The best opinion and the purest thought;
        Watchful o’er her that is her watch herself;
        To doubt her ways that looks too narrowly
        Into her own defects: I, foolish-fearful,
        Have often rudely, out of giddy flames,
        Barr’d her those objects which she shuns herself.
        Thrice I’ve had proof of her most constant temper:
        Come I at unawares by stealth upon her,
        I find her circled in with divine writs
        Of heavenly meditations; here and there
        Chapters with leaves tuck’d up, which when I see,
        They either tax pride or adultery.
        Ah, let me curse myself, that could be jealous
        Of her whose mind no sin can make rebellious!
        And here the unmatch’d comes.

                      _Enter_ MISTRESS HAREBRAIN.

        Now, wife, i’faith, they’re gone;
        Push,[800] see how fearful ’tis! will you not credit me?
        They’re gone, i’faith; why, think you I’ll betray you?
        Come, come; thy delight and mine,
        Thy only virtuous friend, thy sweet instructress,
        Is violently taken, grievous sick,
        And, which is worse, she mends not.
          MIS. H. Her friends are sorry for that, sir.
          HAR. She calls still upon thee, poor soul, remembers
        thee still, thy name whirls in her breath; where’s
        mistress Harebrain? says she.
          MIS. H. Alas, good soul!
          HAR. She made me weep thrice:
        Sh’as put thee in a jewel in her will.
          MIS. H. E’en to th’ last gasp a kind soul!
          HAR. Take my man, go, visit her.
          MIS. H. Pray, pardon me, sir;
        Alas, my visitation cannot help her!
          HAR. O, yet the kindness of a thing, wife!—Still
        She holds the same rare temper. [_Aside._]—Take my man,
           I say.
          MIS. H. I would not take your man, sir,
        Though I did purpose going.
          HAR. No? thy reason.
          MIS. H. The world’s condition is itself so vild,[801]
             sir,
        ’Tis apt to judge the worst of those deserve not;
        ’Tis an ill-thinking age, and does apply
        All to the form of its own luxury;[802]
        This censure flies from one, that from another;
        That man’s her squire, says he; her pimp, the tother;
        She’s of the stamp, a third; fourth, I ha’ known her:
        I’ve heard this, not without a burning cheek.
        Then our attires are tax’d; our very gait
        Is call’d in question; where[803] a husband’s presence
        Scatters such thoughts, or makes ’em sink for fear
        Into the hearts that breed ’em: nay, surely,
        If I went, sir, I would entreat your company.
          HAR. Mine? prithee, wife;—I have been there already.
          MIS. H. That’s all one; although you bring me but to th’
        door, sir, I would entreat no farther.
          HAR. Thou’rt such a wife! why, I will bring thee thither
        then, but not go up, I swear.
          MIS. H. I’faith, you shall not; I do not desire it, sir.
          HAR. Why, then, content.
          MIS. H. Give me your hand, you will do so, sir?
          HAR. Why, there’s my lip I will.
          MIS. H. Why, then I go, sir.
          HAR. With me, or no man! incomparable such a woman!
        [_Aside._]
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.

          _The Courtesan’s Bed-chamber. The Courtesan[804]
              discovered in bed; phials, gallipots, plates, and
              an hour-glass by her._

          _Enter_ PENITENT BROTHEL, _disguised as a doctor of
                                physic_.

          PEN. B. Lady!
          COUR. Ha, what news?
          PEN. B. There’s one sir Bounteous Progress newly
        alighted from his foot-cloth,[805] and his mare waits at
        door, as the fashion is.
          COUR. ’Slid, ’tis the knight that privately maintains
        me; a little, short, old, spiny[806] gentleman in a
        great doublet?
          PEN. B. The same; I know ’m.
          COUR. He’s my sole revenue, meat, drink, and raiment. My
        good physician, work upon him; I’m weak.
          PEN. B. Enough.

                         _Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS.

          SIR B. Why, where be these ladies? these plump, soft,
        delicate creatures? ha?
          PEN. B. Who would you visit, sir?
          SIR B. Visit, who? what are you, with the plague in your
        mouth?
          PEN. B. A physician, sir.
          SIR B. Then you are a loose-liver, sir; I have put you
        to your purgation.
          PEN. B. But you need none, you’re purged in a worse
        fashion.
          COUR. Ah, sir Bounteous!
          SIR B. How now? what art thou?
          COUR. Sweet sir Bounteous!
          SIR B. Passion of me, what an alteration’s here!
        Rosamond sick, old Harry? here’s a sight able to make an
        old man shrink! I was lusty when I came in, but I am
        down now, i’faith: mortality! yea, this puts me in mind
        of a hole seven foot deep; my grave, my grave, my grave.
        Hist, master doctor, a word, sir; hark, ’tis not the
        plague, is’t?
          PEN. B. The plague, sir? no.
          SIR B. Good.
          PEN. B. He ne’er asks whether it be the pox or no; and
        of the twain that had been more likely.        [_Aside._
          SIR B. How now, my wench? how dost?
          COUR. Huh,—weak, knight,—huh.
          PEN. B. She says true, he’s a weak knight indeed.
                                                      [_Aside._
          SIR B. Where does it hold thee most, wench?
          COUR. All parts alike, sir.
          PEN. B. She says true still, for it holds her in none.
                                                      [_Aside._
          SIR B. Hark in thine ear, thou’rt breeding of young
        bones; I am afraid I have got thee with child, i’faith.
          COUR. I fear that much, sir.
          SIR B. O, O, if it should! a young Progress when all’s
        done!
          COUR. You have done your good will, sir.
          SIR B. I see by her ’tis nothing but a surfeit of Venus,
        i’faith; and though I be old, I have gi’n’t her;—but
        since I had the power to make thee sick, I’ll have the
        purse to make thee whole, that’s certain.—Master doctor.
          PEN. B. Sir?
          SIR B. Let’s hear, I pray, what is’t you minister to
        her.
          PEN. B. Marry, sir, some precious cordial, some costly
        refocillation,[807] a composure comfortable and
        restorative.
          SIR B. Ay, ay, that, that, that.
          PEN. B. No poorer ingrediences than the liquor of coral,
        clear amber, or _succinum_; unicorn’s horn, six grains;
        _magisterium perlarum_, one scruple——
          SIR B. Ah, hah![808]
          PEN. B. _Ossis de corde cervi_, half a scruple; _aurum
        potabile_, or his tincture——
          SIR B. Very precious, sir.
          PEN. B. All which being finely contunded, and mixed in a
        stone or glass mortar with the spirit of diamber——
          SIR B. Nay, pray, be patient, sir.
          PEN. B. That’s impossible; I cannot be patient and a
        physician too, sir.
          SIR B. O, cry you mercy, that’s true, sir.
          PEN. B. All which aforesaid——
          SIR B. Ay, there you left, sir.
          PEN. B. When it is almost exsiccate or dry, I add
        thereto _olei succini_, _olei masi_, _et cinnamomi_.
          SIR B. So, sir, _olei masi_, that same oil of mace is a
        great comfort to both the counters.[809]
          PEN. B. And has been of a long time, sir.
          SIR B. Well, be of good cheer, wench; there’s gold for
        thee, huh.—Let her want for nothing, master doctor; a
        poor kinswoman of mine, nature binds me to have a care
        of her.—There I gulled you, master doctor. [_Aside._]—
        Gather up a good spirit, wench! the fit will away; ’tis
        but a surfeit of gristles:—ha, ha, I have fitted her: an
        old knight and a cock a’ th’ game still; I have not
        spurs for nothing, I see.
          PEN. B. No, by my faith, they’re hatched; they cost you
        an angel,[810] sir.
          SIR B. Look to her, good master doctor; let her want
        nothing: I’ve given her enough already, ha, ha, ha!
                                                       [_Exit._
          COUR. So, is he gone?
          PEN. B. He’s like himself, gone.
          COUR. Here’s somewhat to set up with. How soon he took
        occasion to slip into his own flattery, soothing his
        own defects! He only fears he has done that deed which
        I ne’er feared to come from him in my life. This
        purchase[811] came unlooked for.
          PEN. B. Hist, the pair of sons and heirs.
          COUR. O, they’re welcome! they bring money.

                   _Enter_ INESSE _and_ POSSIBILITY.

          POS. Master doctor.
          PEN. B. I come to you, gentlemen.
          POS. How does she now?
          PEN. B. Faith, much after one fashion, sir.
          IN. There’s hope of life, sir?
          PEN. B. I see no signs of death in[812] her.
          POS. That’s some comfort; will she take any thing yet?
          PEN. B. Yes, yes, yes, she’ll take still; sh’as a kind
        of facility in taking. How comes your band[813] bloody,
        sir?
          IN. You may see I met with a scab, sir.
          PEN. B. _Diversa genera scabierum_, as Pliny reports,
        there are divers kind of scabs.
          IN. Pray, let’s hear ’em, sir.
          PEN. B. An itching scab, that is your harlot; a sore
        scab, your usurer; a running scab,[814] your promoter; a
        broad scab, your intelligencer; but a white scab, that’s
        a scald knave and a pander: but, to speak truth, the
        only scabs we are now-a-days troubled withal are new
        officers.[815]
          IN. Why, now you come to mine, sir; for I’ll be sworn
        one of them was very busy about my head this morning,
        and he should be a scab by that; for they are ambitious,
        and covet the head.
          PEN. B. Why, you saw I derived him, sir.
          IN. You physicians are mad gentlemen.
          PEN. B. We physicians see the most sights of any men
        living. Your astronomers look upward into th’ air, we
        look downward into th’ body; and, indeed, we have power
        upward and downward.
          IN. That you have, i’faith, sir.
          POS. Lady, how cheer you now?
          COUR. The same woman still,—huh!
          POS. That’s not good.
          COUR. Little alteration. Fie, fie, you have been too
        lavish, gentlemen.
          IN. Puh, talk not of that, lady; thy health’s worth a
        million.—Here, master doctor, spare for no cost.
                                               [_Giving money._
          POS. Look what you find there, sir.
          COUR. What do you mean, gentlemen? put up, put up;
        You see I’m down, and cannot strive with you,
        I’d[816] rule you else; you have me at advantage;
        But if e’er[817] I live, I will requite it deeply.
          IN. Tut, an’t come to that once, we’ll requite ourselves
        well enough.
          POS. Mistress Harebrain, lady, is setting forth to visit
        you too.
          COUR. Ha?—huh!
          PEN. B. There struck the minute[818] that brings forth
             the birth
        Of all my joys and wishes: but see the jar now!
        How shall I rid these from her?               [_Aside._
          COUR. Pray, gentlemen,
        Stay not above an hour from my sight.
          IN. ’S foot, we are not going, lady!
          PEN. B. Subtilely brought about! yet ’twill not do;
             they’ll stick by’t.— [_Aside._
        A word with you, gentlemen.
          BOTH. What says master doctor?
          PEN. B. She wants but settling of her sense with rest;
        One hour’s sleep, gentlemen, would set all parts in
           tune.
          POS. He says true, i’faith.
          IN. Get her to sleep, master doctor; we’ll both sit here
        and watch by her.
          PEN. B. Hell’s angels watch you! no art can prevail
             with ’em:
        What with the thought of joys, and sight of crosses,
        My wits are at Hercules’ Pillars; _non plus ultra_.
                                                      [_Aside._
          COUR. Master doctor, master doctor!
          PEN. B. Here, lady.
          COUR. Your physic works; lend me your hand.
          POS. Farewell, sweet lady.
          IN. Adieu, master doctor.
                            [_Exeunt_ POSSIBILITY _and_ INESSE.
          COUR. So.
          PEN. B. Let me admire thee!
        The wit of man wanes and decreases soon,
        But women’s wit is ever at full moon.

                      _Enter_ MISTRESS HAREBRAIN.

          There shot a star from heaven!
        I dare not yet behold my happiness,
        The splendour is so glorious and so piercing.
          COUR. Mistress Harebrain, give my wit thanks hereafter;
        your wishes are in sight, your opportunity spacious.
          MIS. H. Will you but hear a word from me?
          COUR. Whooh!
          MIS. H. My husband himself brought me to th’ door, walks
        below for my return; jealousy is prick-eared, and will
        hear the wagging of a hair.
          COUR. Pish, you’re a faint liver; trust yourself with
        your pleasure, and me with your security; go.
          PEN. B. The fulness of my wish!
          MIS. H. Of my desire!
          PEN. B. Beyond this sphere I never will aspire!
                   [_Exeunt_ PEN. BROTHEL _and_ MIS. HAREBRAIN.
                       [HAREBRAIN _opens the door and listens;
                             the Courtesan perceiving him_.
          HAR. I’ll listen: now the flesh draws nigh her end,
        At such a time women exchange their secrets,
        And ransack the close corners of their hearts:
        What many years have[819] whelm’d, this hour imparts.
                                                      [_Aside._
          COUR. Pray, sit down, there’s a low stool. Good mistress
        Harebrain, this was kindly done,—huh,—give me your
        hand,—huh,—alas, how cold you are! even so is your
        husband, that worthy, wise gentleman; as comfortable a
        man to woman in my case as ever trod—huh—shoe-leather.
        Love him, honour him, stick by him: he lets you want
        nothing that’s fit for a woman; and, to be sure on’t, he
        will see himself that you want it not.
          HAR. And so I do, i’faith; ’tis right my humour.
                                                      [_Aside._
          COUR. You live a lady’s life with him; go where you
        will, ride when you will, and do what you will.
          HAR. Not so, not so, neither; she’s better looked to.
                                                      [_Aside._
          COUR. I know you do, you need not tell me that: ’twere
        e’en pity of your life, i’faith, if ever you should
        wrong such an innocent gentleman. Fie, mistress
        Harebrain, what do you mean? come you to discomfort me?
        nothing but weeping with you?
          HAR. She’s weeping! t’as made her weep: my wife shews
        her good nature already.                      [_Aside._
          COUR. Still, still weeping? huff, huff, huff; why, how
        now, woman? hey, hy, hy, for shame, leave; suh, suh, she
        cannot answer me for snobbing.[820]
          HAR. All this does her good; beshrew my heart, and[821]
        I pity her; let her shed tears till morning, I’ll stay
        for her. She shall have enough on’t, by my good will;
        I’ll not be her hinderance.                   [_Aside._
          COUR. O no! lay your hand here, mistress Harebrain; ay,
        there: O there, there lies my pain, good gentlewoman!
        Sore? O ay, I can scarce endure your hand upon’t!
          HAR. Poor soul, how she’s tormented!         [_Aside._
          COUR. Yes, yes; I eat a cullis[822] an hour since.
          HAR. There’s some comfort in that yet, she may ’scape
        it.                                             [_Aside._
          COUR. O, it lies about my heart much!
          HAR. I’m sorry for that, i’faith; she’ll hardly ’scape
             it.                                      [_Aside._
          COUR. Bound? no, no; I’d a very comfortable stool this
        morning.
          HAR. I’m glad of that, i’faith, that’s a good sign; I
        smell she’ll ’scape it now.                   [_Aside._
          COUR. Will you be going then?
          HAR. Fall back, she’s coming.               [_Aside._
          COUR. Thanks, good mistress Harebrain; welcome, sweet
        mistress Harebrain; pray, commend me to the good
        gentleman your husband.
          HAR. I could do that myself now.            [_Aside._
          COUR. And to my uncle Winchcomb, and to my aunt
        Lipsalve, and to my cousin Falsetop, and to my cousin
        Lickit, and to my cousin Horseman, and to all my good
        cousins in Clerkenwell and St. John’s.

             _Re-enter_ MIS. HAREBRAIN _and_ PEN. BROTHEL.

          MIS. H. At three days’ end my husband takes a journey.
          PEN. B. O thence I derive a second meeting!
          MIS. H. May it prosper still!
        Till then I rest a captive to his will.—
        Once again, health, rest, and strength to thee, sweet
        lady: farewell, you witty squall.—Good master doctor,
        have a care to her body; if you stand her friend, I know
        you can do her good.
          COUR. Take pity of your waiter; go: farewell, sweet
        mistress Harebrain.
          HAR. [_coming forward_] Welcome, sweet wife, alight
             upon my lip!
        Never was hour spent better.
          MIS. H. Why, were you
        Within the hearing, sir?
          HAR. Ay, that I was, i’faith,
        To my great comfort; I deceiv’d you there, wife;
        Ha, ha!
        I do entreat thee, nay, conjure thee, wife,
        Upon my love, or what can more be said,
        Oftener to visit this sick virtuous maid.
          MIS. H. Be not so fierce, your will shall be obey’d.
          HAR. Why, then, I see thou lov’st me.
                                   [_Exit with_ MIS. HAREBRAIN.
          PEN. B. Art of ladies!
        When plots are e’en past hope, and hang their head,
        Set with a woman’s hand, they thrive and spread.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                             _A Room._[823]

            _Enter_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and others_.

          FOL. Was’t not well managed, you necessary mischiefs?
        did the plot want either life or art?
          MAW. ’Twas so well, captain, I would you could make such
        another muss[824] at all adventures.
          FOL. Dost call’t a muss? I am sure my grandsire ne’er
        got his money worse in his life than I got it from him.
        If ever he did cozen the simple, why, I was born to
        revenge their quarrel; if ever oppress the widow, I, a
        fatherless child, have done as much for him. And so ’tis
        through the world, either in jest or earnest. Let the
        usurer look for’t; for craft recoils in the end, like an
        overcharged musket, and maims the very hand that puts
        fire to’t. There needs no more but a usurer’s own blow
        to strike him from hence to hell; ’twill set him forward
        with a vengeance. But here lay the jest, whoresons; my
        grandsire, thinking in his conscience that we had not
        robbed him enough o’ernight, must needs pity me i’ th’
        morning, and give me the rest.
          MAW. Two hundred pounds in fair rose-nobles,[825] I
        protest.
          FOL. Push,[826] I knew he could not sleep quietly till
        he had paid me for robbing of him too: ’tis his humour,
        and the humour of most of your rich men in the course of
        their lives; for, you know, they always feast those
        mouths that are least needy, and give them more that
        have too much already; and what call you that but
        robbing of themselves a courtlier way?—O!——
          MAW. Cuds me, how now, captain?
          FOL. A cold fit that comes over my memory, and has a
        shrewd pull at my fortunes.
          MAW. What’s that, sir?
          FOL. Is it for certain, lieutenant, that my grandsire
        keeps an uncertain creature, a quean?
          MAW. Ay, that’s too true, sir.
          FOL. So much the more preposterous for me; I shall hop
        shorter by that trick; she carries away the thirds at
        least: ’twill prove entailed land, I am afraid, when
        all’s done, i’faith. Nay,
        I’ve[827] known a vicious old thought-acting father
        Damn’d only in his dreams, thirsting for game
        (When his best parts hung down their heads for shame),
        For his blanch’d harlot[828] dispossess his son,
        And make the pox his heir; ’twas gravely done!
        How hadst thou first knowledge on’t, lieutenant?
                  MAW. Faith, from discourse; yet, all the policy
        That I could use, I could not get her name.
          FOL. Dull slave, that ne’er could’st spy it!
          MAW. But the manner of her coming was described to me.
          FOL. How is the manner, prithee?
          MAW. Marry, sir, she comes most commonly coached.
          FOL. Most commonly coached, indeed; for coaches are as
        common now-a-days as some that ride in ’em. She comes
        most commonly coached?
          MAW. True, there I left, sir; guarded with some leash of
        pimps.
          FOL. Beside the coachman?
          MAW. Right, sir; then alighting, she’s privately
        received by master Gumwater.
          FOL. That’s my grandsire’s chief gentleman[829] i’ th’
        chain of gold: that he should live to be a pander, and
        yet look upon his chain and his velvet jacket!
          MAW. Then is your grandsire rounded[830] i’ th’ ear; the
        key given after the Italian fashion, backward; she
        closely conveyed into his closet; there remaining, till
        either opportunity smile upon his credit, or he send
        down some hot caudle to take order in his performance.
          FOL. Peace, ’tis mine own, i’faith; I ha’t!
          MAW. How now, sir?
          FOL. Thanks, thanks to any spirit
        That mingled it ’mongst my inventions!
          HOB. Why, master Follywit——
          THE REST.[831] Captain——
          FOL. Give me scope, and hear me.
        I’ve[832] begot that means, which will both furnish me,
        And make that quean walk under his conceit.
          MAW. That were double happiness; to put thyself into
        money, and her out of favour.
          FOL. And all at one dealing.
          HOB. ’S foot, I long to see that hand played!
          FOL. And thou shalt see’t quickly, i’faith: nay, ’tis in
        grain; I warrant it hold colour. Lieutenant, step behind
        yon hanging: if I mistook not at my entrance, there
        hangs the lower part of a gentlewoman’s gown, with a
        mask and a chinclout:[833] bring all this way. Nay, but
        do’t cunningly, now; ’tis a friend’s house, and I’d use
        it so; there’s a taste for you.         [_Exit_ MAWWORM.
          HOB. But, prithee, what wilt thou do with a
        gentlewoman’s lower part?
          FOL. Why, use it.
          HOB. You’ve answered me, indeed, in that; I can demand
        no farther.
          FOL. Well said.—Lieutenant——

                  _Re-enter_ MAWWORM _with gown, &c._

          MAW. What will you do now, sir?
          FOL. Come, come, thou shalt see a woman quickly made up
        here.
          MAW. But that’s against kind,[834] captain; for they are
        always long a-making ready.[835]
          FOL. And is not most they do against kind, I prithee? To
        lie with their horse-keeper, is not that against kind?
        to wear half moons[836] made of another’s hair, is not
        that against kind? to drink down a man, she that should
        set him up, pray is not that monstrously against kind
        now? Nay, over with it, lieutenant, over with it; ever
        while you live put a woman’s clothes over her head:
        Cupid plays best at blindman buff.
          MAW. You shall have your will, maintenance; I love mad
        tricks as well as you for your heart, sir: but what
        shift will you make for upper-bodies, captain?
          FOL. I see now thou’rt an ass; why, I’m ready.
          MAW. Ready?
          FOL. Why, the doublet serves as well as the best, and is
        most in fashion; we’re all male to th’ middle; mankind
        from the beaver to th’ bum. ’Tis an Amazonian time; you
        shall have women shortly tread their husbands. I should
        have a couple of locks behind; prithee, lieutenant, find
        ’em out for me, and wind ’em about my hatband: nay, you
        shall see, we’ll be in fashion to a hair, and become all
        with probability: the most musty-visage critic shall not
        except against me.
          MAW. Nay, I’ll give thee thy due behind thy back; thou
        art as mad a piece of clay——
          FOL. Clay! dost call thy captain clay? Indeed, clay was
        made to stop holes; he says true. Did not I tell you,
        rascals, you should see a woman quickly made up?
          HOB. I’ll swear for’t, captain.
          FOL. Come, come, my mask and my chinclout—come into th’
        court.
          MAW. Nay, they were both i’ th’ court long ago, sir.
          FOL. Let me see; where shall I choose two or three for
        pimps, now? but I cannot choose amiss amongst you all,
        that’s the best. Well, as I am a quean, you were best
        have a care of me, and guard me sure. I give you warning
        beforehand; ’tis a monkey-tailed age. Life, you shall go
        nigh to have half a dozen blithe fellows surprise me
        cowardly, carry me away with a pair of oars, and put in
        at Putney!
          MAW. We should laugh at that, i’faith.
          FOL. Or shoot in upo’ th’ coast of Cue.[837]
          MAW. Two notable fit landing-places for lechers, P and
        C, Putney and Cue.
          FOL. Well, say you have fair warning on’t; the hair
        about the hat is as good as a flag[838] upo’ th’ pole at
        a common play-house, to waft company; and a chinclout is
        of that powerful attraction, I can tell you, ’twill draw
        more linen to’t.
          MAW. Fear not us, captain; there’s none here but can
        fight for a whore as well as some Inns-a’-court-man.
          FOL. Why, then, set forward; and as you scorn
        two-shilling brothel,
        Twelvepenny panderism, and such base bribes,
        Guard me from bonny scribs and bony scribes.[839]
          MAW. Hang ’em, pensions and allowances! four-pence
        halfpenny a meal, hang ’em!                   [_Exeunt._


                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


               _A Chamber in_ PENITENT BROTHEL’S _House_.

        _Enter out of his study_ PENITENT BROTHEL,[840] _a book
                             in his hand_.

          PEN. B. Ha? read that place again—_Adultery
        Draws the divorce ’twixt heaven and the soul_.
        Accursed man, that stand’st divorc’d from heaven!
        Thou wretched unthrift, that hast play’d away
        Thy eternal portion at a minute’s game;
        To please the flesh hast blotted out thy name!
        Where were thy nobler meditations busied,
        That they durst trust this body with itself;
        This natural drunkard, that undoes us all,
        And makes our shame apparent in our fall?
        Then let my blood pay for’t, and vex and boil!
        My soul, I know, would never grieve to th’ death
        Th’ eternal spirit, that feeds her with his breath:
        Nay, I that knew the price of life and sin,
        What crown is kept for continence, what for lust,
        The end of man, and glory of that end,
        As endless as the giver,
        To doat on weakness, slime, corruption, woman!
        What is she, took asunder from her clothes?
        Being ready,[841] she consists of hundred pieces,
        Much like your German clock,[842] and near ally’d;
        Both are so nice, they cannot go for pride:
        Beside a greater fault, but too well known,
        They’ll strike to ten, when they should stop at one.
        Within these three days the next meeting’s fix’d;
        If I meet then, hell and my soul be mix’d!
        My lodging I know constantly, she not knows:
        Sin’s hate is the best gift that sin bestows:
        I’ll ne’er embrace her more; never, bear witness, never.

         _Enter Succubus in the shape of_ MIS. HAREBRAIN,[843]
                    _and claps him on the shoulder_.

          SUC. What, at a stand? the fitter for my company.
          PEN. B. Celestial soldiers guard me!
          SUC. How now, man?
        ’Las, did the quickness of my presence fright thee?
          PEN. B. Shield me,[844] you ministers of faith and
             grace!
          SUC. Leave, leave; are you not ashamed to use such words
        to a woman?
          PEN. B. Thou’rt a devil!
          SUC. A devil? feel, feel, man; has a devil flesh and
        bone?
          PEN. B. I do conjure thee, by that dreadful power——
          SUC. The man has a delight to make me tremble—
        Are these the fruits of thy adventurous love?
        Was I tic’d[845] for this, to be so soon rejected?
        Come, what has chang’d thee so, delight?
          PEN. B. Away!
          SUC. Remember——
          PEN. B. Leave my sight!
          SUC. Have I this meeting wrought with cunning,
        Which, when I come, I find thee shunning?
        Rouse thy amorous thoughts, and twine me;
        All my interest I resign thee:
        Shall we let slip this mutual hour,
        Comes so seldom in her[846] power?
        Where’s thy lip, thy clip, thy fadom?[847]
        Had women such loves, would’t not mad ’em?
        Art a man? or dost abuse one?
        A love, and know’st not how to use one!
        Come, I’ll teach thee.
          PEN. B. Do not follow——
          SUC. Once so firm, and now so hollow!
        When was place and season sweeter?
        Thy bliss in sight, and dar’st not meet her?
        Where’s thy courage, youth, and vigour?
        Love’s best pleas’d when’t’s seiz’d[848] with rigour:
        Seize me, then, with veins most cheerful;
        Women love no flesh that’s fearful:
        ’Tis but a fit; come, drink’t away,
        And dance and sing, and kiss and play!
        Fa le la, le la, fa le la, le la la;
        Fa le la, fa la le, la le la!
                              [_Singing and dancing round him._
          PEN. B. Torment me not!
          SUC. Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la lo!
          PEN. B. Fury!
          SUC. Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la lo!
          PEN. B. Devil, I do conjure thee once again,
        By that soul-quaking thunder, to depart,
        And leave this chamber freed from thy damn’d art!
                                  [_Succubus stamps, and exit._
        It has prevail’d—O my sin-shaking sinews!
        What should I think?—Jasper, why, Jasper!

                            _Enter_ JASPER.

          JAS. Sir? how now? what has disturb’d you, sir?
          PEN. B. A fit, a qualm. Is mistress Harebrain[849]
        gone?
          JAS. Who, sir? mistress Harebrain?
          PEN. B. Is she gone, I say?
          JAS. Gone? why, she was never here yet.
          PEN. B. No?
          JAS. Why, no, sir.
          PEN. B. Art sure on’t?
          JAS. Sure on’t?
        If I be sure I breathe, and am myself.
          PEN. B. I like it not.  [_Aside._]—Where kept’st thou?
          JAS. I’ th’ next room, sir.
          PEN. B. Why, she struck by thee, man.
          JAS. You’d make one mad, sir; that a gentlewoman should
        steal by me, and I not hear her! ’s foot, one may hear
        the ruffling of their bums[850] almost an hour before we
        see ’em.
          PEN. B. I will be satisfied, although to hazard.
        What though her husband meet me? I am honest:
        When men’s intents are wicked, their guilt haunts ’em;
        But when they’re just, they’re arm’d, and nothing daunts
           ’em.                             [_Aside, and exit._
          JAS. What strange humour call you this? he dreams of
        women, and both his eyes broad open!           [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                  _A Room in_ SIR BOUNTEOUS’S _House_.

            _Enter at one door_ SIR BOUNTEOUS, _at another_
                               GUMWATER.

          SIR B. Why, how now, master Gumwater? what’s the news
        with your haste?
          GUM. I have a thing to tell your worship——
          SIR B. Why, prithee, tell me; speak, man.
          GUM. Your worship shall pardon me, I have better
        bringing-up than so.
          SIR B. How, sir?
          GUM. ’Tis a thing made fit for your ear, sir——
          SIR B. O, O, O, cry you mercy; now I begin to taste you.
        Is she come?
          GUM. She’s come, sir.
          SIR B. Recovered? well and sound again?
          GUM. That’s to be feared, sir.
          SIR B. Why, sir?
          GUM. She wears a linen cloth about her jaw.[851]
          SIR B. Ha, ha, haw! why, that’s the fashion,
        You whoreson Gumwater.
          GUM. The fashion, sir?
        Live I so long time to see that a fashion,
        Which rather was an emblem of dispraise?
        It was suspected much in Monsieur’s days.[852]
          SIR B. Ay, ay, in those days; that was a queasy[853]
        time: our age is better hardened now, and put oftener in
        the fire; we are tried what we are. Tut, the pox is as
        natural now as an ague in the spring-time; we seldom
        take physic without it. Here, take this key; you
        know[854] what duties belong to’t. Go, give order for a
        cullis:[855] let there be a good fire made i’ th’ matted
        chamber: do you hear, sir?
          GUM. I know my office, sir.                  [_Exit._
          SIR B. An old man’s venery is very chargeable, my
        masters; there’s much cookery belongs to’t.     [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


             _Another Chamber in_ SIR BOUNTEOUS’S _House_.

          _Enter_ GUMWATER, _with_ FOLLYWIT _disguised as the
                         Courtesan and masked_.

          GUM. Come, lady: you know where you are now?
          FOL. Yes, good master Gumwater.
          GUM. This is the old closet, you know.
          FOL. I remember it well, sir.
          GUM. There stands a casket: I would my yearly revenue
        were but worth the wealth that’s locked in’t, lady! yet
        I have fifty pound a-year, wench.
          FOL. Beside your apparel, sir?
          GUM. Yes, faith, have I.
          FOL. But then you reckon your chain,[856] sir.
          GUM. No, by my troth, do I not, neither: faith, and[857]
        you consider me rightly, sweet lady, you might admit a
        choice gentleman into your service.
          FOL. O, pray away, sir!
          GUM. Pusha,[858] come, come; you do but hinder your
        fortunes, i’faith: I have the command of all the house,
        I can tell you; nothing comes into th’ kitchen, but
        comes through my hands.
          FOL. Pray do not handle me, sir.
          GUM. Faith you’re too nice, lady; and as for my secrecy,
        you know I have vowed it often to you.
          FOL. Vowed it? no, no, you men are fickle.
          GUM. Fickle? ’sfoot! bind me, lady——
          FOL. Why, I bind you by virtue of this chain to meet me
        to-morrow at the Flower-de-luce yonder, between nine and
        ten.
          GUM. And if I do not, lady, let me lose it, thy love,
        and my best fortunes!
          FOL. Why, now I’ll try you; go to.
          GUM. Farewell, sweet lady!
                                [_Kisses_ FOLLYWIT, _and exit_.
          FOL. Welcome, sweet coxcomb! by my faith, a good
        induction! I perceive by his overworn phrase, and his
        action toward the middle region still, there has been
        some saucy nibbling motion; and no doubt the cunning
        quean waited but for her prey: and I think ’tis better
        bestowed upon me, for his soul’s health, and his body’s
        too. I’ll teach the slave to be so bold yet, as once to
        offer to vault into his master’s saddle, i’faith. Now,
        casket, by your leave:
        I’ve[859] seen your outside oft, but that’s no proof;
        Some have fair outsides that are nothing worth.
                                          [_Rifles the casket._
        Ha! now, by my faith, a gentlewoman of very good parts;
        diamond, ruby, sapphire; _Onyx cum prole silexque_![860]
        if I do not wonder how the quean ’scaped tempting, I’m
        an hermaphrodite! sure she could lack nothing, but the
        devil to point to’t; and I wonder that he should be
        missing: well, ’tis better as it is. This is the fruit
        of old grunting venery; grandsire, you may thank your
        drab for this. O fie, in your crinkling days, grandsire,
        keep a courtesan, to hinder your grandchild! ’tis
        against nature, i’faith, and I hope you’ll be weary
        on’t.
        Now to my villains that lurk close below:
        Who keeps a harlot, tell him this from me,
        He needs nor thief, disease, nor enemy.        [_Exit._

                         _Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS.

          SIR B. Ah, sirrah, methink I feel myself well toasted,
        bombasted, rubbed, and refreshed! but, i’faith, I cannot
        forget to think how soon sickness has altered her to my
        taste. I gave her a kiss at bottom o’ th’ stairs, and,
        by th’ mass, methought her breath had much ado to be
        sweet; like a thing compounded, methought, of wine,
        beer, and tobacco; I smelt much pudding[861] in’t.
        It may be but my fancy, or her physic:
        For this I know, her health gave such content,
        The fault rests in her sickness, or my scent.—
        How dost thou now, sweet girl? what, well recover’d?
        Sickness quite gone, ha? speak—ha? wench? Frank
           Gullman!—

        Why, body of me, what’s here? my casket wide open, broke
        open, my jewels stolen!—Why, Gumwater!

                          _Re-enter_ GUMWATER.

          GUM. Anon, anon, sir.
          SIR B. Come hither, Gumwater.
          GUM. That were small manners, sir, i’faith: I’ll find a
        time anon; your worship’s busy yet.
          SIR B. Why, Gumwater!
          GUM. Foh, nay then you’ll make me blush, i’faith, sir——
          SIR B. Where’s this creature?
          GUM. What creature is’t you’d have, sir?
          SIR B. The worst that ever breathes.
          GUM. That’s a wild boar, sir.
          SIR B. That’s a vild[862] whore, sir;—where didst thou
        leave her, rascal?
          GUM. Who? your recreation, sir?
          SIR B. My execration, sir!
          GUM. Where I was wont; in your worship’s closet.
          SIR B. A pox engross her! it appears too true. See you
        this casket, sir?
          GUM. My chain, my chain, my chain! my one and only
        chain!                                         [_Exit._
          SIR B. Thou runnest to much purpose now, Gumwater, yea!
        Is not a quean enough to answer for, but she must join a
        thief to’t? a thieving quean! nay, I have done with her,
        i’faith. ’Tis a sign sh’as been sick a’ late; for she’s
        a great deal worse than she was: by my troth, I would
        have pawned my life upon’t.
        Did she want any thing? was she not supplied?
        Nay, and liberally; for that’s an old man’s sin:
        We’ll feast our lechery, though we starve our kin.
        Is not my name sir Bounteous? am I not express’d there?
        Ah, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie! but I perceive,
        Though she have never so complete a friend,
        A strumpet’s love will have a waft[863] i’ th’ end,
        And distaste the vessel. I can hardly bear this;
        But say, I should complain; perhaps she has pawn’d ’em—
        ’S foot, the judges will but laugh at it, and bid her
        borrow more money of ’em; make the old fellow pay for’s
        lechery; that’s all the mends I get. I have seen the
        same case tried at Newbury the last ’sizes.
        Well, things must slip and sleep; I will dissemble it,
        Because my credit shall not lose her lustre:
        But whilst I live, I’ll neither love nor trust her.
        I ha’ done, I ha’ done, I ha’ done with her, i’faith!
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE IV.


                    _A Hall in_ HAREBRAIN’S _House_.

                _Knocking within;[864] enter a Servant._

          SER. Who’s that knocks?
          PEN. B. [_within_] A friend.
                                     [_Servant opens the door._

                       _Enter_ PENITENT BROTHEL.

          SER. What’s your will, sir?
          PEN. B. Is master Harebrain[865] at home?
          SER. No, newly gone from it, sir.
          PEN. B. Where’s the gentlewoman his wife?
          SER. My mistress is within, sir.
          PEN. B. When came she in, I pray?
          SER. Who, my mistress? she was not out these two days,
        to my knowledge.
          PEN. B. No? trust me, I’d thought I’d seen her. I would
        request a word with her.
          SER. I’ll tell her, sir.
          PEN. B. I thank you. [_Exit Servant._] It likes me[866]
        worse and worse.

                      _Enter_ MISTRESS HAREBRAIN.

          MIS. H. Why, how now, sir? ’twas desperately
           adventur’d;
        I little look’d for you until the morrow.
          PEN. B. No?
        Why what made you at my chamber then even now?
          MIS. H. I at your chamber?
          PEN. B. Pooh, dissemble not;
        Come, come, you were there.
          MIS. H. By my life, you wrong me, sir!
          PEN. B. What?
          MIS. H. First, you’re not ignorant what watch keeps
             o’er me;
        And for your chamber, as I live, I know’t not.
          PEN. B. Burst into sorrow then, and grief’s extremes,
        Whilst I beat on this flesh!
          MIS. H. What is’t disturbs you, sir?
          PEN. B. Then was the devil in your likeness there.
          MIS. H. Ha!
          PEN. B. The very devil assum’d thee formally;[867]
        That face, that voice, that gesture, that attire,
        E’en as it sits on thee, not a plait alter’d;
        That beaver band, the colour of that periwig,[868]
        The farthingale above the navel; all
        As if the fashion were his own invention.
          MIS. H. Mercy, defend me!
          PEN. B. To beguile me more,
        The cunning Succubus told me that meeting
        Was wrought ’a purpose by much wit and art;
        Wept to me; laid my vows before me; urg’d me;
        Gave me the private marks of all our love;
        Woo’d me in wanton and effeminate rhymes,
        And sung and danc’d about me like a fairy:
        And had not worthier cogitations blest me,
        Thy form, and his enchantments, had possess’d me.
          MIS. H. What shall become of me? my own thoughts doom
             me.
          PEN. B. Be honest, then the devil will ne’er assume
             thee:
        He has no pleasure in that shape t’ abide
        Where these two sisters reign not, lust or pride;
        He as much trembles at a constant mind
        As looser flesh at him: be not dismay’d;
        Spring, souls, for joy! his policies are betray’d!
        Forgive me, mistress Harebrain, on whose soul
        The guilt hangs double,
        My lust, and thy enticement! both I challenge;
        And therefore of due vengeance it appear’d
        To none but me, to whom both sins inher’d.
        What knows the lecher, when he clips[869] his whore,
        Whether it be the devil his parts adore?
        They’re both so like, that, in our natural sense,
        I could discern no change nor difference.
        No marvel, then, times should so stretch and turn;
        None for religion, all for pleasure burn.
        Hot zeal into hot lust is now transform’d;
        Grace into painting, charity into clothes;
        Faith into false hair, and put off as often.
        There’s nothing but our virtue knows a mean:
        He that kept open house, now keeps a quean.
        He will keep open still, that he commends;
        And there he keeps a table for his friends:
        And she consumes more than his[870] sire could hoard,
        Being more common than his house or board.

                      _Enter_ HAREBRAIN _behind_.

        Live honest, and live happy, keep thy vows;
        She’s part a virgin whom but one man knows:
        Embrace thy husband, and beside him none;
        Having but one heart, give it but to one.
          MIS. H. I vow it on my knees, with tears true-bred,
        No man shall ever wrong my husband’s bed!
          PEN. B. Rise; I’m thy friend for ever.
          HAR. [_coming forward_] And I thine
        For ever and ever!—Let me embrace thee, sir,
        Whom I will love even next unto my soul,
        And that’s my wife.
        Two dear rare gems this hour presents me with,
        A wife that’s modest, and a friend that’s right:
        Idle suspect and fear, now take your flight!
          PEN. B. A happy inward peace crown both your joys!
          HAR. Thanks above utterance to you!—

                            _Enter Servant._

                                      Now, the news?
          SER. Sir Bounteous Progress, sir,
        Invites you and my mistress to a feast
        On Tuesday next; his man attends without.
          HAR. Return both with our willingness and thanks.—
                                               [_Exit Servant._
        I will entreat you, sir, to be my guest.
          PEN. B. Who, I, sir?
          HAR. Faith, you shall.
          PEN. B. Well, I’ll break strife.
          HAR. A friend’s so rare, I’ll sooner part from life.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                                SCENE V.


                   _A Room in the Courtesan’s House._

        _Enter_ FOLLYWIT, _and the Courtesan striving from him_.

          FOL. What, so coy, so strict? come, come!
          COUR. Pray, change your opinion, sir; I am not for
             that use.
          FOL. Will you but hear me?
          COUR. I shall hear that I would not.         [_Exit._
          FOL. ’S foot, this is strange! I’ve seldom seen a
             wench
        Stand upon stricter points: life, she will not
        Endure to be courted! does she e’er think to prosper?
        I’ll ne’er believe that tree can bring forth fruit
        That never bears a blossom; courtship’s a blossom,
        And often brings forth fruit in forty weeks.
        ’Twere a mad part in me now to turn over:
        If e’er[871] there were any hope on’t, ’tis at this
           instant.
        Shall I be madder now than e’er I’ve[872] been?
        I’m in the way, i’faith.
        Man’s never at high height of madness full
        Until he love, and prove a woman’s gull.
        I do protest in earnest, I ne’er knew
        At which end to begin t’ affect a woman
        Till this bewitching minute; I ne’er saw
        Face worth my object till mine eye met hers;
        I should laugh and[873] I were caught, i’faith: I’ll see
        her again, that’s certain, whate’er comes on’t, by
        your favour, ladies.[874]

                            _Enter Mother._

          MOT. You’re welcome, sir.
          FOL. Know you the young gentlewoman that went in lately?
          MOT. I have best cause to know her; I’m her mother,
             sir.
          FOL. O, in good time. I like the gentlewoman well; a
        pretty contrived beauty.
          MOT. Ay, nature has done her part, sir.
          FOL. But she has one uncomely quality.
          MOT. What’s that, sir?
          FOL. ’S foot, she’s afraid of a man.
          MOT. Alas! impute that to her bashful spirit,
        She’s fearful of her honour.
          FOL. Of her honour? ’slid, I’m sure I cannot get
        Her maidenhead with breathing upon her,
        Nor can she lose her honour in her tongue.
          MOT. True; and I have often told her so; but what would
        you have of a foolish virgin, sir, a wilful virgin? I
        tell you, sir, I need not have been in that solitary
        estate that I am, had she had grace and boldness to have
        put herself forward; always timorsome, always backward!
        Ah, that same peevish[875] honour of hers has undone her
        and me both, good gentleman! the suitors, the jewels,
        the jointures, that have[876] been offered her! we had
        been made women[877] for ever: but what was her fashion?
        she could not endure the sight of a man, forsooth, but
        run and hole[878] herself presently. So choice of her
        honour, I am persuaded, whene’er she has husband,
        She’ll[879] e’en be a precedent for all married wives
        How to direct their actions and their lives.
          FOL. Have you not so much power with her to command her
        presence?
          MOT. You shall see straight what I can do, sir.
                                                       [_Exit._
          FOL. Would I might be hanged, if my love do not stretch
        to her deeper and deeper! Those bashful maiden humours
        take me prisoner. When there comes a restraint upon[880]
        flesh, we are always most greedy upon’t; and that makes
        your merchant’s wife oftentimes pay so dear for a
        mouthful. Give me a woman as she was made at first;
        simple of herself, without sophistication, like this
        wench: I cannot abide them when they have tricks, set
        speeches, and artful entertainments.
        You shall have some so impudently aspècted,
        They will outcry the forehead of a man,
        Make him blush first, and talk him into silence;
        And this is counted manly in a woman:
        It may hold so; sure, womanly it is not.
        No;
        If e’er I love, or any thing move me,
        ’Twill be a woman’s simple modesty.

        _Re-enter Mother, bringing in strivingly the Courtesan._

          COUR. Pray, let me go; why, mother, what do you mean?
        I beseech you, mother! is this your conquest now?
        Great glory ’tis to overcome a poor
        And silly virgin.
          FOL. The wonder of our time sits in that brow:
        I ne’er beheld a perfect maid[881] till now.
          MOT. Thou childish thing, more bashful than thou’rt
             wise,
        Why dost thou turn aside, and drown thine eyes?
        Look, fearful fool, there’s no temptation near thee;
        Art not asham’d that any flesh should fear thee?[882]
        Why, I durst pawn my life the gentleman
        Means no other but honest and pure love to thee.—
        How say you, sir?
          FOL. By my faith, not I, lady.
          MOT. Hark you there? what think
        You now, forsooth? what grieves your honour now?
        Or what lascivious breath intends to rear
        Against that maiden organ, your chaste ear?
        Are you resolv’d[883] now better of men’s hearts,
        Their faiths, and their affections? With you none,
        Or at most few, whose tongues and minds are one.
        Repent you now of your opinion past;
        Men love as purely as you can be chaste.—
        To her yourself, sir; the way’s broke before you;
        You have the easier passage.
          FOL. Fear not. Come,
        Erect thy happy graces in thy look;
        I am no curious wooer,[884] but, in faith,
        I love thee honourably.
          COUR. How mean you that, sir?
          FOL. ’S foot, as one loves a woman for a wife.
          MOT. Has the gentleman answered you, trow?[885]
          FOL. I do confess it truly to you both,
        My estate is yet but sickly; but I’ve a grandsire
        Will make me lord of thousands at his death.
          MOT. I know your grandsire well; she knows him better.
          FOL. Why, then, you know no fiction: my state then
        Will be a long day’s journey ’bove the waste, wench.
          MOT. Nay, daughter, he says true.
          FOL. And thou shalt often measure it in thy coach,
        And with the wheels’ track make a girdle for’t.
          MOT. Ah, ’twill be a merry journey!
          FOL. What, is’t a match? if’t be, clap hands and lips.
                                           [_Kisses Courtesan._
          MOT. ’Tis done; there’s witness on’t.
          FOL. Why, then, mother, I salute you.
                                              [_Kisses Mother._
          MOT. Thanks, sweet son.
        Son Follywit, come hither; if I might counsel thee,
        We’ll take her e’en[886] while the good mood’s upon her;
        Send for a priest, and clap’t up within this hour.
          FOL. By my troth, agreed, mother.
          MOT. Nor does her wealth consist all in her flesh,
        Though beauty be enough wealth for a woman;
        She brings a dowry of three hundred[887] with her.
          FOL. ’S foot, that will serve [un]til my grandsire
             dies:
        I warrant you he’ll drop away at fall a’ th’ leaf;
        If e’er[888] he reach to All Hollantide,[889] I’ll be
           hang’d.
          MOT. O yes, son, he’s a lusty old gentleman.
          FOL. Ah, pox, he’s given to women! he keeps a quean at
        this present.
          MOT. Fie!
          FOL. Do not tell my wife on’t.
          MOT. That were needless, i’faith.
          FOL. He makes a great feast upon the eleventh of this
        month, Tuesday next, and you shall see players there—I
        have one trick more to put upon him. [_Aside._]—My wife
        and yourself shall go thither before as my guests, and
        prove his entertainment: I’ll meet you there at night.
        The jest will be here; that feast which he makes will,
        unknown to him, serve fitly for our wedding-dinner: we
        shall be royally furnished, and get some charges by’t.
          MOT. An excellent course, i’faith, and a thrifty! why,
             son,
        Methinks you begin to thrive before you’re married.
          FOL. We shall thrive one day, wench, and clip[890]
             enough:
        Between our hopes there’s but a grandsire’s puff.
                                                       [_Exit._
          MOT. So, girl, here was a bird well caught.
          COUR. If ever, here:
        But what for’s grandsire, ’twill scarce please him well.
          MOT. Who covets fruit, ne’er cares from whence it
             fell:
        Thou’st wedded youth and strength; and wealth will fall:
        Last, thou’rt made honest.
          COUR. And that’s worth ’em all.            [_Exeunt._


                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                  _A Room in_ SIR BOUNTEOUS’S _House_.

        _Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS:[891] GUMWATER _and Servants pass
                            over the stage_.

          SIR B. Have a care, blue coats.[892] Bestir yourself,
        master Gumwater; cast an eye into th’ kitchen; o’erlook
        the knaves a little. Every Jack has his friend to-day;
        this cousin, and that cousin, puts in for a dish of
        meat: a man knows not, till he make a feast, how many
        varlets he feeds; acquaintances swarm in every corner,
        like flies at Bartholomew-tide, that come up with
        drovers; ’s foot, I think they smell my kitchen seven
        mile about.—

           _Enter_ HAREBRAIN, MIS. HAREBRAIN, _and_ PENITENT
                                BROTHEL.

        Master Harebrain,[893] and his sweet bedfellow! you’re
        very copiously welcome.

          HAR. Sir, here’s an especial dear friend of ours: we
        were bold to make his way to your table.
          SIR B. Thanks for that boldness ever, good master
        Harebrain: is this your friend, sir?
          HAR. Both my wife’s friend and mine, sir.
          SIR B. Why, then, compendiously, sir, you’re welcome.
          PEN. B. In octavo I thank you, sir.
          SIR B. Excellently retorted, i’faith! he’s welcome for’s
        wit: I have my sorts of salutes, and know how to place
        ’em courtly. Walk in, sweet gentlemen, walk in; there’s
        a good fire i’ th’ hall; you shall have my sweet company
        instantly.
          HAR. Ay, good sir Bounteous.
          SIR B. You shall indeed, gentlemen. [_Exeunt_ HAREBRAIN,
        MIS. HAREBRAIN, _and_ PEN. BROTHEL.]

                             _Enter_ SEMUS.

        —How now? what news brings thee in stumbling now?
          SEM. There are certain players come to town, sir, and
        desire to interlude before your worship.
          SIR B. Players? by the mass, they are welcome; they’ll
        grace my entertainment well: but for certain players,
        there thou liest, boy; they were never more uncertain in
        their lives; now up, and now down; they know not when to
        play, where to play, nor what to play: not when to play,
        for fearful fools; where to play, for puritan fools; nor
        what to play, for critical fools. Go, call ’em in.
        [_Exit_ SEMUS.]—How fitly the whoresons come upo’ th’
        feast! troth, I was e’en wishing for ’em.

         _Re-enter_ SEMUS _with_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and
                     others, disguised as players_.

        O welcome, welcome, my friends!
          FOL. The month of May delights not in her flowers
        More than we joy in that sweet sight of yours.
          SIR B. Well acted, a’ my credit! I perceive he’s your
        best actor.
          SEM. He has greatest share,[894] sir, and may live of
        himself, sir.
          SIR B. What, what?—Put on your hat, sir, pray, put on;
        go to, wealth must be respected: let those that have
        least feathers stand bare. And whose men are you, I
        pray?—nay, keep on your hat still.
          FOL. We serve my lord Owemuch, sir.
          SIR B. My lord Owemuch? by my troth, the welcomest men
        alive! give me all your hands at once! That honourable
        gentleman, he lay at my house in a robbery once, and
        took all quietly, went away cheerfully: I made a very
        good feast for him: I never saw a man of honour bear
        things bravelier away. Serve my lord Owemuch? welcome,
        i’faith!—Some bastard[895] for my lord’s players!
        [_Exit_ SEMUS, _and returns with wine_.]—Where be
        your[896] boys?
          FOL. They come along with the waggon, sir.
          SIR B. Good, good; and which is your politician amongst
        you? now, i’faith, he that works out restraints, makes
        best legs at court, and has a suit made of purpose for
        the company’s business; which is he? come, be not afraid
        of him.
          FOL. I am he, sir.
          SIR B. Art thou he? give me thy hand. Hark in thine ear:
        thou rollest too fast to gather so much moss as thy
        fellow there; champ upon that. Ah, and what play shall
        we have, my masters?
          FOL. A pleasant, witty comedy, sir.
          SIR B. Ay, ay, ay; a comedy in any case, that I and my
        guests may laugh a little: what’s the name on’t?
          FOL. ’Tis called _The Slip_.
          SIR B. _The Slip?_ by my troth, a pretty name, and a
        glib one: go all, and slip into’t, as fast as you can.
        Cover a table for the players! First take heed of a
        lurcher; he cuts deep, he will eat up all from you.—Some
        sherry for my lord’s players there! Sirrah, why this
        will be a true feast, a right Mitre[897] supper, a play
        and all. [_Exeunt_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and
        others, with_ SEMUS.] More lights!

                     _Enter Mother and Courtesan._

        I called for light; here come in two are light enough
        for a whole house, i’faith. Dare the thief look me i’
        th’ face? O impudent times! Go to, dissemble it!
          MOT. Bless you, sir Bounteous!
          SIR B. O welcome, welcome, thief, quean, and bawd!
        welcome all three!
          MOT. Nay, here’s but two on’s, sir.
          SIR B. ’A my troth, I took her for a couple; I’d have
        sworn there had been two faces there.
          MOT. Not all under one hood, sir.
          SIR B. Yes, faith, would I, to see mine eyes bear
             double.
          MOT. I’ll make it hold, sir; my daughter is a couple,
        She was married yesterday.
          SIR B. Buz![898]
          MOT. Nay, to no buzzard neither; a right hawk,
        Whene’er you know him.
          SIR B. Away! he cannot be but a rascal.
        Walk in, walk in, bold guests, that come unsent for!
                                                [_Exit Mother._

        Pox,[899] I perceive how my jewels went now,
        To grace her marriage.                        [_Aside._
          COUR. Would you with me, sir?
          SIR B. Ay;
        How hapt it, wench, you put the slip upon me,
        Not three nights since? I name it gently to you;
        I term it neither pilfer,[900] cheat, nor shark.
          COUR. You’re past my reach.
          SIR B. I’m old, and past your reach, very good; but you
        will not deny this, I trust.
          COUR. With a safe conscience, sir.
          SIR B. Yea? give me thy hand; fare thee[901] well.—I
        have done with her.[902]
          COUR. Give me your hand, sir; you ne’er yet begun with
        me.     [_Exit._
          SIR B. Whew, whew![903] O audacious age!
        She denies me, and all, when on her fingers
        I spied the ruby sit, that does betray her,
        And blushes for her fact! Well, there’s a time for’t,
        For all’s too little now for entertainment,
        Feast, mirth, ay, harmony, and the play to boot;
        A jovial season.—

                          _Re-enter_ FOLLYWIT.

                             How now, are you ready?
          FOL. Even upon readiness, sir.
          SIR B. Keep you your hat on.
          FOL. I have a suit to your worship.
          SIR B. O, cry you mercy; then you must stand bare.
          FOL. We could do all to the life of action, sir, both
        for the credit of your worship’s house, and the grace of
        our comedy——
          SIR B. Cuds me, what else, sir?
          FOL. And for some defects, as the custom is, we would be
        bold to require your worship’s assistance.
          SIR B. Why, with all my heart; what is’t you want?
        speak.
          FOL. One’s a chain for a justice’s hat, sir.
          SIR B. Why, here, here, here, here, whoreson; will this
        serve your turn?                      [_Giving chain._
          FOL. Excellent well, sir.[904]
          SIR B. What else lack you?
          FOL. We should use a ring with a stone in’t.
          SIR B. Nay, whoop, I have given too many rings already;
        talk no more of rings, I pray you: here, here, here,
        make this jewel serve for once.        [_Giving jewel._
          FOL. O this will serve, sir.
          SIR B. What, have you all now?
          FOL. All now, sir; only Time is brought i’ th’ middle of
        the play, and I would desire your worship’s watch-time.
          SIR B. My watch? with all my heart; only give
        Time a charge, that he be not fiddling with it.
                                               [_Giving watch._
          FOL. You shall ne’er see that, sir.
          SIR B. Well, now you are furnish’d, sir, make haste;
             away.
          FOL. E’en as fast as I can, sir: I’ll set my fellows
             going first;
        They must have time and leisure, or they’re dull else.
                                         [_Exit_ SIR BOUNTEOUS.
        I’ll stay and speak a prologue, yet o’ertake ’em:
        I cannot have conscience, i’faith, to go away,
        And ne’er[905] a word to ’em. My grandsire has given me
        Three shares[906] here; sure I’ll do somewhat for ’em.
                                                       [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.

                  _A Hall in_ SIR BOUNTEOUS’S _House_.

_Enter_ SIR BOUNTEOUS, HAREBRAIN, MIS. HAREBRAIN, PENITENT
    BROTHEL, _and other guests_; _Courtesan and Mother_;
    GUMWATER _and Servants_.

          SIR B. More lights, more stools! sit, sit: the plays
           begins.
          HAR.[907] Have you players here, sir Bounteous?
          SIR B. We have ’em for you, sir; fine nimble comedians,
        proper actors most of them.
          PEN. B. Whose men, I pray you, sir?
          SIR B. O, there’s their credit, sir! they serve an
        honourable popular gentleman, ycleped[908] my lord
        Owemuch.
          HAR. My lord Owemuch? he was in Ireland lately.
          SIR B. O, you ne’er knew any of the name but were great
        travellers.
          HAR. How is the comedy called, sir Bounteous?
          SIR B. Marry, sir, _The Slip_.
          HAR. _The Slip?_

                    _Enter, for Prologue_, FOLLYWIT.

          SIR B. Ay, and here the prologue begins to slip in
        upon’s.
          HAR. ’Tis so indeed, sir Bounteous.
          FOL. _We sing of wandering knights, what them betide,
        Who nor in one place nor one shape abide;
        They’re here now, and anon no scouts can reach ’em,
        Being every man well hors’d like a bold Beacham.[909]
        The play which we present no fault shall meet
        But one; you’ll say ’tis short, we’ll say ’tis sweet:
        ’Tis given much to dumb shews, which some praise;
        And, like the term, delights much in delays.
        So to conclude, and give the name her due,
        The play being call’d_ THE SLIP, _I vanish too_.
                                                       [_Exit._
          SIR B. Excellently well acted, and a nimble conceit!
          HAR. The prologue’s pretty, i’faith.
          PEN. B. And went off well.
          SIR B. Ay, that’s the grace of all, when they go away
        well, ah, hah![910]
          COUR. A’ my troth, and[911] I were not married, I could
        find in my heart to fall in love with that player now,
        and send for him to a supper.[912] I know some i’ th’
        town that have done as much, and there took such a good
        conceit of their parts into th’ two-penny room,[913]
        that the actors have been found i’ th’ morning in a less
        compass than their stage, though ’twere ne’er so full of
        gentlemen.[914]
          SIR B. But, passion of me, where be these knaves? will
        they not come away? methinks they stay very long.
          PEN. B. O, you must bear a little, sir; they have many
        shifts to run into.
          SIR B. Shifts call you ’em? they’re horrible long
        things.

                    _Re-enter_ FOLLYWIT _in a fury_.

          FOL. A pox of such fortune, the plot’s betrayed! all
        will come out! yonder they come, taken upon suspicion,
        and brought back by a constable. I was accursed to hold
        society with such coxcombs! what’s to be done? I shall
        be shamed for ever! My wife here, and all! ah, pox—by
        light, happily thought upon! the chain. Invention stick
        to me this once, and fail me ever hereafter! so, so——
                                                      [_Aside._
          SIR B. Life, I say, where be these players?—O, are you
        come? troth, it’s time; I was e’en sending for you.
          HAR. How moodily he walks! what plays he trow?[915]
          SIR B. A[916] justice, upon my credit; I know by the
        chain there.
          FOL. _Unfortunate justice!_
          SIR B. Ah—a—a—
          FOL. _In thy kin unfortunate!
        Here comes thy nephew now upon suspicion,
        Brought by a constable before thee; his vild[917]
        Associates with him;
        But so disguis’d, none knows him but myself.
        Twice have I set him free from officers’ fangs,
        And for his sake his fellows: let him look to’t;
        My conscience will permit but one wink more._
          SIR B. Yea, shall we take justice winking?
          FOL. _For this time
        I have bethought a means to work thy freedom,
        Though hazarding myself. Should the law seize him,
        Being kin to me, ’twould blemish much my name:
        No; I’d rather lean to danger than to shame._
          SIR B. A very explete justice!
          CON. [_within_] Thank you, good neighbours; let me alone
        with ’em now.

        _Enter Constable with_ MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and the rest of_
                        FOLLYWIT’S _companions_.

          MAW. ’S foot, who’s yonder?
          HOB. Dare he sit there?
          THIRD C. Follywit!
          FOURTH C. Captain! pooh—
          FOL. _How now, constable? what news with thee?_
          CON. May it please your worship, sir, here are a company
        of auspicious fellows.
          SIR B. To me? pooh, turn to th’ justice, you whoreson
        hobby-horse!—This is some new player now; they put all
        their fools to the constable’s part still.
          FOL. _What’s the matter, constable? what’s the matter?_
          CON. I have nothing to say to your worship.—They were
        all riding a’ horseback, an’t please your worship.
          SIR B. Yet again? a pox of all asses still! they could
        not ride a’ foot, unless ’twere in a bawdy-house.
          CON. The ostler told me they were all unstable fellows,
        sir.
          FOL. _Why, sure the fellow’s drunk?_
          MAW. We spied that weakness in him long ago, sir;
        Your worship must bear with him, the man’s much
           o’erseen;
        Only in respect of his office we obey’d him.
        Both to appear conformable to law,
        And clear of all offence; for I protest, sir,
        He found us but a’ horseback.
          FOL. _What, he did?_
          MAW. As I have a soul, that’s all, and all he can lay to
        us.
          CON. I’faith, you were not all riding away then?
          MAW. ’S foot, being a’ horseback, sir, that must needs
             follow.
          FOL. _Why, true, sir._
          SIR B. Well said, justice! he helps his kinsman well.
          FOL. _Why, sirrah, do you use to bring gentlemen before
        us for riding away? what, will you have ’em stand still
        when they’re up, like Smug upo’ th’ white horse yonder?
        are your wits steeped? I’ll make you an example for all
        ditch[918] constables, how they abuse justice.—Here,
        bind him to this chair._
          CON. Ha, bind him? ho!
          FOL. _If you want cords, use garters._
                     [MAWWORM, HOBOY, _&c. bind the Constable_.
          CON. Help, help, gentlemen!
          MAW. As fast as we can, sir.
          CON. Thieves, thieves!
          FOL. _A gag will help all this: keep less noise, you
        knave._
          CON. O help! rescue the constable; O, O!
                                               [_They gag him._
          SIR B. Ho, ho, ho, ho!
          FOL. _Why, la, you, who lets you[919] now?
        You may ride quietly; I’ll see you to
        Take horse myself, I have nothing else to do._
              [_Exeunt_ FOLLYWIT, MAWWORM, HOBOY, _and others_.
          CON. O, O, O!
          SIR B. Ha, ha, ha! by my troth, the maddest piece of
        justice, gentlemen, that ever was committed.
          HAR. I’ll be sworn for the madness on’t, sir.
          SIR B. I am deceived, if this prove not a merry comedy
        and a witty.
          PEN. B. Alas, poor constable! his mouth’s open, and
        ne’er a wise word.
          SIR B. Faith, he speaks now e’en as many as he has done;
        he seems wisest when he gapes and says nothing. Ha, ha!
        he turns and tells his tale to me like an ass. What have
        I to do with their riding away? They may ride for me,
        thou whoreson coxcomb, thou! nay, thou art well enough
        served, i’faith.
          PEN. B. But what follows all this while, sir? methinks
        some should pass by before this time, and pity the
        constable.
          SIR B. By th’ mass, and you say true, sir.—Go, sirrah,
        step in; I think they have forgot themselves; call the
        knaves away; they’re in a wood, I believe.
                                               [_Exit Servant._
          CON. Ay, ay, ay!
          SIR B. Hark, the constable says ay, they’re in a wood:
        ha, ha!
          GUM.[920] He thinks long of the time, sir Bounteous.

                          _Re-enter Servant._

          SIR B. How now? when come they?
          SER. Alas, an’t please your worship, there’s not one of
        them to be found, sir!
          SIR B. How?
          HAR. What says the fellow?
          SER. Neither horse nor man, sir.
          SIR B. Body of me! thou liest.
          SER. Not a hair of either, sir.
          HAR. How now, sir Bounteous?
          SIR B. Cheated and defeated! Ungag that rascal; I’ll
        hang him for’s fellows; I’ll make him bring ’em out.
                                       [_They ungag Constable._
          CON. Did not I tell your worship this before?
        Brought ’em before you for suspected persons?
        Stay’d ’em at town’s end upon warning given?
        Made signs that my very jaw-bone aches?[921]
        Your worship would not hear me; call’d me ass,
        Saving your worship’s presence, laugh’d at me.
          SIR B. Ha!
          HAR. I begin to taste it.
          SIR B. Give me leave, give me leave. Why, art not thou
        the constable i’ th’ comedy?
          CON. I’ th’ comedy? why, I am the constable i’ th’
        commonwealth, sir.
          SIR B. I’m[922] gull’d, i’faith, I’m gull’d! When wast
             thou chose?
          CON. On Thursday last, sir.
          SIR B. A pox go with’t! there’t goes.
          PEN. B. I seldom heard jest match it.
          HAR. Nor I, i’faith?
          SIR B. Gentlemen, shall I entreat a courtesy?
          HAR. What is’t, sir?
          SIR B. Do not laugh at me seven year hence.
          PEN. B. We should betray and laugh at our own folly
             then,
        For, of my troth, none here but was deceiv’d in’t.
          SIR B. Faith, that’s some comfort yet; ha, ha! it was
        featly carried; troth, I commend their wits; before our
        faces make us asses, while we sit still and only laugh
        at ourselves!
          PEN. B. Faith, they were some counterfeit rogues, sir.
          SIR B. Why, they confess so much themselves; they said
        they’d play _The Slip_;[923] they should be men of their
        words. I hope the justice will have more conscience,
        i’faith, than to carry away a chain of a hundred
        mark[924] of that fashion.
          HAR. What, sir?
          SIR B. Ay, by my troth, sir;
        Besides a jewel and a jewel’s fellow,
        A good fair watch, that hung about my neck, sir.
          HAR. ’S foot, what did you mean, sir?
          SIR B. Methinks my lord Owemuch’s players should not
        scorn me so, i’faith; they will come, and bring all
        again, I know; push,[925] they will, i’faith; but a
        jest, certainly.

         _Re-enter_ FOLLYWIT _in his own dress, with_ MAWWORM,
                          HOBOY, _and others_.

          FOL. Pray, grandsire, give me your blessing.
          SIR B. Who? son Follywit?                [_Kneeling._
          FOL. This shews like kneeling after the play;[926] I
        praying for my lord Owemuch and his good countess, our
        honourable lady and mistress.
                                                      [_Aside._
          SIR B. Rise, richer by a blessing; thou art welcome.
          FOL. Thanks, good grandsire; I was bold to bring
        Those gentlemen, my friends.
          SIR B. They’re all welcome!
        Salute you that side, and I’ll welcome this side.—
        Sir, to begin with you.
          HAR. Master Follywit!
          FOL. I am glad ’tis our fortune so happily to meet, sir.
          SIR B. Nay, then, you know me not, sir.
          FOL. Sweet mistress Harebrain!
          SIR B. You cannot be too bold, sir.
          FOL. Our marriage known?
          COUR. Not a word yet.
          FOL. The better.
          SIR B. Faith, son, would you had come sooner with these
        gentlemen!
          FOL. Why, grandsire?
          SIR B. We had a play here.
          FOL. A play, sir? no?
          SIR B. Yes, faith! a pox a’ th’ author!
          FOL. Bless us all! why, were they such vild[927] ones,
        sir?
          SIR B. I am sure villanous ones, sir.
          FOL. Some raw, simple fools!
          SIR B. Nay, by th’ mass, these were enough for thievish
        knaves.
          FOL. What, sir?
          SIR B. Which way came you, gentlemen? you could not
        choose but meet ’em.
          FOL. We met a company with hampers after ’em.
          SIR B. O, those were they, those were they! A pox hamper
        ’em!
          FOL. Bless us all again!
          SIR B. They have hampered me finely, sirrah.
          FOL. How,[928] sir?
          SIR B. How, sir? I lent the rascals properties[929] to
        furnish out their play, a chain, a jewel, and a watch;
        and they watched their time, and rid quite away with
        ’em.
          FOL. Are they such creatures?
          SIR B. Hark, hark, gentlemen! by this light, the watch
        rings alarum in his pocket! there’s my watch come
        again, or the very cousin-german to’t: whose is’t,
        whose is’t? by th’ mass, ’tis he! hast thou one, son?
        prithee, bestow it upon thy grand-sire; I now look for
        mine again, i’faith: nay, come with a good will, or
        not at all; I’ll give thee a better thing.—A prize, a
        prize,[930] gentlemen!
                [_Draws chain, &c. out of_ FOLLYWIT’S _pocket_.
          HAR. Great or small?
          SIR B. At once I’ve[931] drawn chain, jewel, watch,
             and all.
          PEN. B. By my faith, you have a fortunate hand, sir!
          HAR. Nay, all to come at once!
          MAW. A vengeance of this foolery!
          FOL. Have I ’scaped the constable to be brought in by
        the watch?
          COUR. O destiny! have I married a thief, mother?
          MOT. Comfort thyself; thou art beforehand with him,
        daughter.
          SIR B. Why, son, why, gentlemen, how long have you been
        my lord Owemuch his servants, i’faith?
          FOL. Faith, grandsire, shall I be true to you?
          SIR B. I think ’tis time; thou’st been a thief
             already.
          FOL. I, knowing the day of your feast, and the natural
        inclination you have to pleasure and pastime, presumed
        upon your patience for a jest, as well to prolong your
        days as——
          SIR B. Whoop! why, then, you took my chain along with
        you to prolong my days, did you?
          FOL. Not so neither, sir;
        And that you may be seriously assur’d
        Of my hereafter stableness of life,
        I have took another course.
          SIR B. What?
          FOL. Took a wife.
          SIR B. A wife! ’s foot, what is she for a fool[932]
        would marry thee, a madman? when was the wedding kept?
        in Bedlam?
          FOL. She’s both a gentlewoman and a virgin.
          SIR B. Stop there, stop there: would I might see her!
          FOL. You have your wish; she’s here.
          SIR B. Ah, ha, ha, ha! this makes amends for all.
          FOL. How now?
          MAW. Captain, do you hear? is she your wife in earnest?
          FOL. How then?
          MAW. Nothing, but pity you, sir.
          SIR B. Speak, son; is’t true?
        Can you gull us, and let a quean gull you?
          FOL. Ha!
          COUR. What I have been is past; be that forgiven,
        And have a soul true both to thee and heaven!
          FOL. Is’t come about? tricks are repaid, I see.
          SIR B. The best is, sirrah, you pledge none but me;
        And since I drink the top, take her—and, hark,
        I spice the bottom with a thousand mark.[933]
          FOL. By my troth, she is as good a cup of nectar as any
        bachelor needs to sip at.
        Tut, give me gold, it makes amends for vice;
        Maids without coin are caudles without spice.
          SIR B. Come, gentlemen, to th’ feast; let not time
             waste;
        We’ve[934] pleas’d our ear, now let us please our taste.
        Who lives by cunning, mark it, his fate’s cast;
        When he has gull’d all, then is himself the last.
                                          [_Exeunt omnes._[935]

                             --------------

            _The Catch[936] for the Fifth Act, sung by_ SIR
                  BOUNTEOUS PROGRESS _to his guests_.

                O for a bowl of fat canary,
                Rich Aristippus,[937] sparkling sherry!
                Some nectar else from Juno’s dairy;
                O these draughts would make us merry!

                O for a wench! I deal in faces,
                And in other daintier things;
                Tickled am I with her embraces;
                Fine dancing in such fairy rings!

                O for a plump, fat leg of mutton,
                Veal, lamb, capon, pig, and cony!
                None is happy but a glutton,
                None an ass but who wants money.

                Wines, indeed, and girls are good,
                But brave victuals feast the blood:
                For wenches, wine, and lusty cheer,
                Jove would come down to surfeit here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE ROARING GIRL.

[Illustration: Man Smoking Pipe]




              _The Roaring Girle. Or Moll Cut-Purse. As it hath
              lately beene Acted on the Fortune-stage by the
              Prince his Players. Written by T. Middleton and T.
              Dekkar. Printed at London for Thomas Archer, and
              are to be sold at his shop in Popes head-pallace,
              neere the Royall Exchange._ 1611. 4to. On the
              title-page is the woodcut, a fac-simile of which
              is now given, representing Moll in her male dress,
              with these words running along the inner margin,—
              “_My case is alter’d, I must worke for my
              liuing_.”

              This drama has been reprinted in the sixth vol. of
              the last two editions of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_.

              _Roaring Boys_ was a cant term for the riotous,
              quarrelsome blades of the time, who abounded in
              London, and took pleasure in annoying its quieter
              inhabitants. Of _Roaring Girls_, the heroine of
              the present play was the choicest specimen. Her
              real name was Mary Frith, though she was most
              commonly known by that of Moll Cutpurse. According
              to the author of her _Life_,[938] “she was born
              A.D. 1589, in Barbican, at the upper end of
              Aldersgate Street,” p. 3; but Malone,[939] more
              correctly it should seem, has fixed her birth in
              1584. “From the first entrance into a competency
              of age,” she assumed the doublet, “and to her
              dying day she would not leave it off, till the
              infirmity and weaknesse of nature had brought her
              a-bed to her last travail, changed it for a
              wastcoat, and her pettycoats for a winding-sheet,”
              _Life_, p. 18. She was distinguished in the
              different characters of bully, prostitute,
              procuress, fortune-teller, thief, pickpocket,
              receiver of stolen goods, and forger of writings.
              A letter from John Chamberlain to Mr. Carleton,
              dated Feb. 11, 1611-12, gives the following
              account of her doing penance: “The last Sunday
              Moll Cutpurse, a notorious baggage that used to go
              in man’s apparel, and challenged the field of
              diverse gallants; was brought to the same place
              [Paul’s Cross], where she wept bitterly, and
              seemed very penitent; but it is since doubted she
              was maudlin drunk, being discovered to have
              tippel’d of three quarts of sack before she came
              to her penance. She had the daintiest preacher or
              ghostly father that ever I saw in the pulpit, one
              Radcliffe of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford, a
              likelier man to have led the revels in some inn of
              court, than to be where he was. But the best is,
              he did extreme badly, and so wearied the audience,
              that the best part went away, and the rest tarried
              rather to hear Moll Cutpurse than him.”[940] With
              the preceding extract let us compare what the
              “fair penitent” is made to say in the _Life_
              already quoted: “Some promooting Apparitor, set on
              by an adversary of mine, whom I could never
              punctually know, cited me to appear in the Court
              of the Arches, where was an Accusation exhibited
              against me for wearing undecent and manly apparel.
              I was advised by my Proctor to demur to the
              Jurisdiction of the Court, as for a Crime, if
              such, not cognizable there or elsewhere; but he
              did it to spin out my Cause, and get my Mony; for
              in the conclusion, I was sentenced there to stand
              and do Penance in a White Sheet at Paul’s Cross,
              during morning Sermon on a Sunday,” p. 69.

              We are told that she robbed General Fairfax of 250
              Jacobuses upon Hounslow Heath, shot him through
              the arm, and killed two horses on which a couple
              of his servants rode; and that being closely
              pursued by some Parliamentarian officers quartered
              at Hounslow, to whom Fairfax told the adventure,
              and her horse failing her at Turnham Green, she
              was apprehended and carried to Newgate, after
              which she was condemned, but procured her pardon
              by giving her adversary 2000 pounds![941] The
              story seems to be not a little exaggerated.

              Nor is the reader bound to believe the subjoined
              anecdote; but, as Moll had a house of her own
              “within 2 doors of the Globe Tavern in Fleet
              Street, over against the Conduit,” _Life_, p. 47,
              and appears to have acquired considerable property
              by her various rogueries, the circumstance of her
              supplying the wine is by no means improbable:
              “After that unnatural and detestable Rebellion of
              the Scots in 1638, upon his Majesties return home
              to London, where preparation was made for his
              Magnificent Entry, I was also resolved to show my
              Loyal and Dutiful Respects to the King in as ample
              manner as I could or might be permitted.... I was
              resolved in my own account to beare a part in the
              charge of this Solemnity; and therefore undertook
              to supply Fleetstreet Conduit adjacent to my House
              with Wine, to run continually for that triumphal
              Day, which I performed with no less Expence then
              Credit and delight, and the satisfaction of all
              Comers and Spectators. And as the King passed by
              me, I put out my Hand and caught Him by His, and
              grasped it very hard, saying, _Welcome Home_
              CHARLES! His Majesty smiled, and I beleeve took me
              for some Mad Bold Beatrice or other, while the
              people shouted and made a noyse, in part at my
              Confidence and presumption, and in part for joy of
              the King’s Return. The rest of that Day I spent in
              jollity and carousing, and concluded the night
              with Fireworks and Drink. This celebrated Action
              of mine, it being the Town talk, made people look
              upon me at another rate then formerly.” _Life_,
              pp. 95-98.

              A dropsy, from which she had long been suffering,
              and which, it is said, would probably have carried
              her off sooner if she had not indulged greatly in
              the use of tobacco—(for she gloried in being the
              first female smoker)—at last proved fatal to the
              Roaring Girl. In the Memoir above cited, she is
              represented as bidding adieu to the world “this
              three score and fourteenth year of my age,” p.
              169. A MS.[942] states that she died at her house
              in Fleet Street, July 26, 1659; that she was
              buried in the church of Saint Bridget’s; and that
              she left twenty pounds by will, that the Conduit
              might run with wine when King Charles the Second
              should return. Granger says,[943] that her death
              took place in her 75th year.

              She is supposed to be the person alluded to in
              Shakespeare’s _Twelfth Night_, where Sir Toby
              exclaims, “Wherefore are these things hid?
              wherefore have these gifts a curtain before them?
              are they like to take dust, like _mistress Mall’s_
              picture?” Act i. sc. 3.

              On the books of the Stationers’ Company, August
              1610, is entered “A Booke called the Madde Prancks
              of Merry Mall of the Bankside, with her Walks in
              Man’s Apparel, and to what Purpose. Written by
              John Day.”[944]

              In _Rubbe and A great Cast. Epigrams. By Thomas
              Freeman, Gent._, 1614, 4to, is

                                 “Epigram 90.
                     _Of Moll Cutpurse disguised going._

              “They say Mol’s honest, and it may bee so,
              But yet it is a shrewd presumption no:
              To touch but pitch, ’tis knowne it will defile;
              Moll weares the breech, what may she be the while?
              Sure shee that doth the shadow so much grace,
              What will shee when the substance comes in place?”

              She figures in act ii. sc. 1 of Field’s _Amends
              for Ladies_,[945] 1618, where she is thus
              addressed:

                              ——“Hence, lewd impudent!
              I know not what to term thee, man or woman,
              For Nature, shaming to acknowledge thee
              For either, hath produc’d thee to the world
              Without a sex: some say thou art a woman,
              Others, a man; and many, thou art both
              Woman and man; but I think rather, neither;
              Or man and horse, as the old Centaurs were
                 feign’d.”

              In _The Water-cormorant his Complaint against a
              Brood of Land-cormorants_ (first printed, I
              believe, in 1622), Taylor says,

              “That if our Grand-fathers and Grand-dams should
              Rise from the dead, and these mad times behold,
              Amazed they halfe madly would admire
              At our fantasticke gestures and attire;
              And they would thinke that England in conclusion
              Were a meere bable Babell of confusion;
              That Muld-sack[946] for his most vnfashion’d
                 fashions
              Is the fit patterne of their transformations;
              And _Mary Frith_ doth teach them modesty,
              For she doth keepe one fashion constantly,
              And therefore she deserues a Matrons praise,
              In these inconstant Moon-like changing dayes.”
                                         p. 6.—_Works_, ed.
                                            1630.

              From _The Witch of Edmonton_ (by W. Rowley,
              Dekker, and Ford, acted about 1623), we learn that
              a certain dog, used in baiting bulls and bears,
              was called _Moll Cutpurse_, after our heroine: act
              v. sc. 1. Ford’s _Works_, by Gifford, vol. ii. p.
              547.

              She is thus mentioned in Brome’s _Court Beggar_,
              acted 1632;

              "CIT. Sprecious! How now! my fob has been fubd
              to-day of six pieces, and a dozen shillings at
              least.... My watch is gone out of my pocket too o’
              th’ right side.... Ile go to honest _Moll_ about
              it presently." Act ii. sc. 1. _Five New Playes_,
              1653.

              In the following couplet of Butler (the second
              line of which Swift has transferred, with a slight
              alteration, into his _Baucis and Philemon_), the
              allusion is most probably to Moll Cutpurse, and
              not, as Grey thinks, to Mary Carlton;

              “A bold Virago, stout and tall,
              As Joan of France, or _English Mall_.”
                                _Hudibras_, Part i. c. ii. 367.

              With a quotation from a play called _The Feigned
              Astrologer_, 1668, I conclude this notice of Mary
              Frith;

              “We cannot do that neither in quiet,
              So many have found his lodging out:
              And now, _Moll Cut-purse_, that oracle of felonie
              Is dead, there’s not a pocket pickt,
              But hee’s acquainted with it.” Act iv. sc. 2, p.
                 62.

              Thomas Dekker, whose name is coupled with
              Middleton’s on the title-page of _The Roaring
              Girl_, was (as perhaps few readers require to be
              told) a very prolific and popular dramatist: many
              of his plays have perished.


                   TO THE COMIC PLAY-READERS, VENERY
                             AND LAUGHTER.


              The fashion of play-making I can properly
              compare to nothing so naturally as the alteration
              in apparel; for in the time of the great
              crop-doublet, your huge bombasted plays, quilted
              with mighty words to lean purpose, were[947] only
              then in fashion: and as the doublet fell, neater
              inventions began to set up. Now, in the time of
              spruceness, our plays follow the niceness of our
              garments; single plots, quaint conceits, lecherous
              jests, drest up in hanging sleeves: and those are
              fit for the times and the termers.[948] Such a
              kind of light-colour summer stuff, mingled with
              divers colours, you shall find this published
              comedy; good to keep you in an afternoon from dice
              at home in your chambers: and for venery, you
              shall find enough for sixpence,[949] but well
              couched and[950] you mark it; for Venus, being a
              woman, passes through the play in doublet and
              breeches; a brave disguise and a safe one, if the
              statute untie not her codpiece point. The book I
              make no question but is fit for many of your
              companies, as well as the person itself, and may
              be allowed both gallery-room at the playhouse, and
              chamber-room at your lodging. Worse things, I must
              needs confess, the world has taxed her for than
              has been written of her; but ’tis the excellency
              of a writer to leave things better than he finds
              ’em; though some obscene fellow, that cares not
              what he writes against others, yet keeps a
              mystical bawdyhouse himself, and entertains
              drunkards, to make use of their pockets and vent
              his private bottle-ale at midnight,—though such a
              one would have ript up the most nasty vice that
              ever hell belched forth, and presented it to a
              modest assembly, yet we rather wish in such
              discoveries, where reputation lies bleeding, a
              slackness of truth than fulness of slander.

                                          THOMAS MIDDLETON.


                               PROLOGUE.

              A play expected long makes the audience look
              For wonders; that each scene should be a book,
              Compos’d to all perfection: each one comes
              And brings a play in’s head with him; up he sums
              What he would of a roaring girl have writ;
              If that he finds not here, he mews at it.
              Only we [do] entreat you think our scene
              Cannot speak high, the subject being but mean;
              A roaring girl, whose notes till now ne’er were,
              Shall fill with laughter our vast theatre.[951]
              That’s all which I dare promise: tragic passion,
              And such grave stuff, is this day out of fashion.
              I see Attention sets wide ope her gates
              Of hearing, and with covetous listening waits,
              To know what girl this roaring girl should be,
              For of that tribe are many. One is she
              That roars at midnight in deep tavern-bowls,
              That beats the watch, and constables controls;
              Another roars i’ th’ daytime, swears, stabs, gives
                 braves,
              Yet sells her soul to the lust of fools and
                 slaves:
              Both these are suburb-roarers. Then there’s
                 beside[952]
              A civil city-roaring girl, whose pride,
              Feasting, and riding, shakes her husband’s state,
              And leaves him roaring through an iron grate.
              None of these roaring girls is ours; she flies
              With wings more lofty; thus her character lies—
              Yet what need characters, when to give a guess
              Is better than the person to express?
              But would you know who ’tis? would you hear her
                 name?
              She’s call’d mad Moll; her life our acts proclaim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.


                SIR ALEXANDER WENGRAVE.
                SEBASTIAN WENGRAVE, _his son_.
                SIR GUY FITZALLARD.
                SIR DAVY DAPPER.
                JACK DAPPER, _his son_.
                SIR ADAM APPLETON.
                SIR THOMAS LONG.
                SIR BEAUTEOUS GANYMEDE.
                LORD NOLAND.
                GOSHAWK.
                LAXTON.
                GREENWIT.
                GALLIPOT, _an apothecary_.
                TILTYARD, _a feather-seller_.
                OPENWORK, _a sempster_.
                NEATFOOT, _Sir A. Wengrave’s man_.
                GULL, _page to Jack Dapper_.
                TRAPDOOR.
                TEARCAT.
                _Coachman._
                _Porter._
                _Tailor._
                CURTLEAX, _a sergeant_.
                HANGER, _his yeoman_.
                _Gentlemen, Cutpurses, &c._

                MOLL, _the Roaring Girl_.
                MARY FITZALLARD, _daughter to Sir Guy_.
                MISTRESS GALLIPOT.
                MISTRESS TILTYARD.
                MISTRESS OPENWORK.

                                Scene, LONDON.

                              THE ROARING GIRL.

                             --------------


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


             _A Room in_ SIR ALEXANDER WENGRAVE’S _House_.

          _Enter_ MARY FITZALLARD _disguised like a sempster,
              with a case for bands, and_ NEATFOOT _with her, a
              napkin on his shoulder, and a trencher[953] in his
              hand, as from table_.

          NEAT. The young gentleman, our young master, sir
        Alexander’s son, is it into his ears, sweet damsel,
        emblem of fragility, you desire to have a message
        transported, or to be transcendent?
          MARY. A private word or two, sir; nothing else.
          NEAT. You shall fructify in that which you come
        for; your pleasure shall be satisfied to your full
        contentation. I will, fairest tree of generation,
        watch when our young master is erected, that is to
        say, up, and deliver him to this your most white
        hand.
          MARY. Thanks, sir.
          NEAT. And withal certify him, that I have culled out for
        him, now his belly is replenished, a daintier bit or
        modicum than any lay upon his trencher at dinner. Hath
        he notion of your name, I beseech your chastity?
          MARY. One, sir, of whom he bespake falling bands.[954]
          NEAT. Falling bands? it shall so be given him. If you
        please to venture your modesty in the hall amongst a
        curl-pated company of rude serving-men, and take such as
        they can set before you, you shall be most seriously and
        ingeniously[955] welcome.
          MARY. I have dined[956] indeed already, sir.
          NEAT. Or will you vouchsafe to kiss the lip of a cup of
        rich Orleans in the buttery amongst our waiting-women?
          MARY. Not now, in truth, sir.
          NEAT. Our young master shall then have a feeling of your
        being here; presently it shall so be given him.
          MARY. I humbly thank you, sir. [_Exit_ NEATFOOT.] But
             that my bosom
        Is full of bitter sorrows, I could smile
        To see this formal ape play antic tricks;
        But in my breast a poison’d arrow sticks,
        And smiles cannot become me. Love woven slightly,
        Such as thy false heart makes, wears out as lightly;
        But love being truly bred i’ th’ soul, like mine,
        Bleeds even to death at the least wound it takes,—
        The more we quench this [fire], the less it slakes:
        O me!

              _Enter_ SEBASTIAN WENGRAVE _with_ NEATFOOT.

          SEB. A sempster speak with me, sayest thou?
          NEAT. Yes, sir; she’s there, _viva voce_ to deliver her
        auricular confession.
          SEB. With me, sweetheart? what is’t?
          MARY. I have brought home your bands, sir.
          SEB. Bands?—Neatfoot.
          NEAT. Sir?
          SEB. Prithee, look in; for all the gentlemen are upon
        rising.
          NEAT. Yes, sir; a most methodical attendance shall be
        given.
          SEB. And dost hear? if my father call for me, say I am
        busy with a sempster.
          NEAT. Yes, sir; he shall know it that you are busied
        with a needle-woman.
          SEB. In’s ear, good Neatfoot.
          NEAT. It shall be so given him.               [_Exit._
          SEB. Bands? you’re mistaken, sweetheart, I bespake
             none:
        When, where, I prithee? what bands? let me see them.
          MARY. Yes, sir; a bond[957] fast seal’d with solemn
             oaths,
        Subscrib’d unto, as I thought, with your soul;
        Deliver’d as your deed in sight of heaven:
        Is this bond cancellèd? have you forgot me?
          SEB. Ha! life of my life, sir Guy Fitzallard’s
             daughter?
        What has transform’d my love to this strange shape?
        Stay; make all sure [_shuts the door_]; so: now speak
           and be brief,
        Because the wolf’s at door that lies in wait
        To prey upon us both. Albeit mine eyes
        Are blest by thine, yet this so strange disguise
        Holds me with fear and wonder.
          MARY. Mine’s a loath’d sight;
        Why from it are you banish’d else so long?
          SEB. I must cut short my speech: in broken language
        Thus much, sweet Moll; I must thy company shun;
        I court another Moll: my thoughts must run
        As a horse runs that’s blind round in a mill,
        Out every step, yet keeping one path still.
          MARY. Umph! must you shun my company? in one knot
        Have both our hands by th’ hands of heaven been tied,
        Now to be broke? I thought me once your bride;
        Our fathers did agree on the time when:
        And must another bedfellow fill my room?
          SEB. Sweet maid, let’s lose no time; ’tis in heaven’s
             book
        Set down, that I must have thee; an oath we took
        To keep our vows: but when the knight your father
        Was from mine parted, storms began to sit
        Upon my covetous father’s brow[s], which fell
        From them on me. He reckon’d up what gold
        This marriage would draw from him; at which he swore,
        To lose so much blood could not grieve him more:
        He then dissuades me from thee, call’d thee not fair,
        And ask’d what is she but a beggar’s heir?
        He scorn’d thy dowry of five thousand marks.[958]
        If such a sum of money could be found,
        And I would match with that, he’d not undo it,
        Provided his bags might add nothing to it;
        But vow’d, if I took thee, nay, more, did swear it,
        Save birth, from him I nothing should inherit.
          MARY. What follows then? my shipwreck?
          SEB. Dearest, no:
        Though wildly in a labyrinth I go,
        My end is to meet thee: with a side-wind
        Must I now sail, else I no haven can find,
        But both must sink for ever. There’s a wench
        Call’d Moll, mad Moll, or merry Moll; a creature
        So strange in quality, a whole city takes
        Note of her name and person: all that affection
        I owe to thee, on her in counterfeit passion
        I spend, to mad my father: he believes
        I doat upon this Roaring Girl, and grieves
        As it becomes a father for a son
        That could be so bewitch’d: yet I’ll go on
        This crooked way, sigh still for her, feign dreams
        In which I’ll talk only of her: these streams
        Shall, I hope, force my father to consent
        That here I anchor, rather than be rent
        Upon a rock so dangerous. Art thou pleas’d,
        Because thou seest we’re waylaid, that I take
        A path that’s safe, though it be far about?
          MARY. My prayers with heaven guide thee!
          SEB. Then I will on:
        My father is at hand; kiss, and begone!
        Hours shall be watch’d for meetings: I must now,
        As men for fear, to a strange idol bow.
          MARY. Farewell!
          SEB. I’ll guide thee forth: when next we meet,
        A story of Moll shall make our mirth more sweet.
                                                     [_Exeunt._

        _Enter_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE, SIR DAVY DAPPER, SIR ADAM
            APPLETON, GOSHAWK, LAXTON, _and Gentlemen_.

          ALL. Thanks, good sir Alexander, for our bounteous
           cheer!
          S. ALEX. Fie, fie, in giving thanks you pay too dear.
          S. DAVY. When bounty spreads the table, faith, ’twere
             sin,
        At going off if thanks should not step in.
          S. ALEX. No more of thanks, no more. Ay, marry, sir,
        Th’ inner room was too close: how do you like
        This parlour, gentlemen?
          ALL. O, passing well!
          S. ADAM. What a sweet breath the air casts here, so
             cool!
          GOS. I like the prospect best.
          LAX. See how ’tis furnish’d!
          S. DAVY. A very fair sweet room.
          S. ALEX. Sir Davy Dapper,
        The furniture that doth adorn this room
        Cost many a fair grey groat ere it came here;
        But good things are most cheap when they’re most dear.
        Nay, when you look into my galleries,
        How bravely they’re trimm’d up, you all shall swear
        You’re highly pleas’d to see what’s set down there:
        Stories of men and women, mix’d together
        Fair ones with foul, like sunshine in wet weather;
        Within one square a thousand heads are laid,
        So close that all of heads the room seems made;
        As many faces there, fill’d with blithe looks,
        Shew like the promising titles of new books
        Writ merrily, the readers being their own eyes,
        Which seem to move and to give plaudities;
        And here and there, whilst with obsequious ears
        Throng’d heaps do listen, a cut-purse thrusts and leers
        With hawk’s eyes for his prey; I need not shew him;
        By a hanging, villanous look yourselves may know him,
        The face is drawn so rarely: then, sir, below,
        The very floor, as ’twere, waves to and fro,
        And, like a floating island, seems to move
        Upon a sea bound in with shores above.
          ALL. These sights are excellent!
          S. ALEX. I’ll shew you all:
        Since we are met, make our parting comical.

             _Re-enter_ SEBASTIAN WENGRAVE _with_ GREENWIT.

          SEB. This gentleman, my friend, will take his leave,
           sir.
          S. ALEX. Ha! take his leave, Sebastian, who?
          SEB. This gentleman.
          S. ALEX. Your love, sir, has already given me some
             time,
        And if you please to trust my age with more,
        It shall pay double interest: good sir, stay.
          GREEN. I have been too bold.
          S. ALEX. Not so, sir: a merry day
        ’Mongst friends being spent, is better than gold sav’d.—
        Some wine, some wine! Where be these knaves I keep?

              _Re-enter_ NEATFOOT _with several Servants_.

          NEAT. At your worshipful elbow, sir.
          S. ALEX. You’re kissing my maids, drinking, or fast
             asleep.
          NEAT. Your worship has given it us right.
          S. ALEX. You varlets, stir!
        Chairs, stools, and cushions!—
               [_Servants bring in wine, and place chairs, &c._
                                     Prithee, sir Davy Dapper,
        Make that chair thine.
          S. DAVY. ’Tis but an easy gift;
        And yet I thank you for it, sir: I’ll take it.
          S. ALEX. A chair for old sir Adam Appleton!
          NEAT. A back friend to your worship.
          S. ADAM. Marry, good Neatfoot,
        I thank thee for’t; back friends sometimes are good.
          S. ALEX. Pray, make that stool your perch, good master
             Goshawk.
          GOS. I stoop to your lure, sir.
          S. ALEX. Son Sebastian,
        Take master Greenwit to you.
          SEB. Sit, dear friend.
          S. ALEX. Nay, master Laxton—furnish master Laxton
        With what he wants, a stone,—a stool, I would say,
        A stool.
          LAX. I had rather stand, sir.
          S. ALEX. I know you had, good master Laxton: so, so.
                             [_Exeunt_ NEATFOOT _and Servants_.
        Now here’s a mess of friends; and, gentlemen,
        Because time’s glass shall not be running long,
        I’ll quicken it with a pretty tale.
          S. DAVY. Good tales do well
        In these bad days, where vice does so excel.
          S. ADAM. Begin, sir Alexander.
          S. ALEX. Last day I met
        An aged man, upon whose head was scor’d
        A debt of just so many years as these
        Which I owe to my grave: the man you all know.
          ALL. His name, I pray you, sir.
          S. ALEX. Nay, you shall pardon me:
        But when he saw me, with a sigh that brake,
        Or seem’d to break, his heart-strings, thus he spake:
        O my good knight, says he, (and then his eyes
        Were richer even by that which made them poor,
        They’d spent so many tears they had no more),
        O sir, says he, you know it! for you ha’ seen
        Blessings to rain upon mine house and me:
        Fortune, who slaves men, was my slave; her wheel
        Hath spun me golden threads; for, I thank heaven,
        I ne’er had but one cause to curse my stars.
        I ask’d him then what that one caue might be.
          ALL. So, sir.
          S. ALEX. He paus’d: and as we often see
        A sea so much becalm’d, there can be found
        No wrinkle on his brow, his waves being drown’d
        In their own rage; but when th’ imperious wind[s]
        Use strange invisible tyranny to shake
        Both heaven’s and earth’s foundation at their noise,
        The seas, swelling with wrath to part that fray,
        Rise up, and are more wild, more mad than they;
        Even so this good old man was by my question
        Stirr’d up to roughness; you might see his gall
        Flow even in’s eyes; then grew he fantastical.
          S. DAVY. Fantastical? ha, ha!
          S. ALEX. Yes; and talk[’d] oddly.
          S. ADAM. Pray, sir, proceed:
        How did this old man end?
          S. ALEX. Marry, sir, thus:
        He left his wild fit to read o’er his cards;
        Yet then, though age cast snow on all his hairs,
        He joy’d, because, says he, the god of gold
        Has been to me no niggard; that disease,
        Of which all old men sicken, avarice,
        Never infected me——
          LAX. He means not himself, I’m sure.        [_Aside._
          S. ALEX. For, like a lamp
        Fed with continual oil, I spend and throw
        My light to all that need it, yet have still
        Enough to serve myself: O but, quoth he,
        Though heaven’s dew fall thus on this aged tree,
        I have a son that,[959] like a wedge, doth cleave
        My very heart-root!
          S. DAVY. Had he such a son?
          SEB. Now I do smell a fox strongly.            [_Aside._
          S. ALEX. Let’s see: no, master Greenwit is not yet
        So mellow in years as he; but as like Sebastian,
        Just like my son Sebastian, such another.
          SEB. How finely, like a fencer,
        My father fetches his by-blows to hit me!
        But if I beat you not at your own weapon
        Of subtilty——                                [_Aside._
          S. ALEX. This son, saith he, that should be
        The column and main arch unto my house,
        The crutch unto my age, becomes a whirlwind
        Shaking the firm foundation.
          S. ADAM. ’Tis some prodigal.
          SEB. Well shot, old Adam Bell![960]         [_Aside._
          S. ALEX. No city-monster neither, no prodigal,
        But sparing, wary, civil, and, though wifeless,
        An excellent husband; and such a traveller,
        He has more tongues in his head than some have teeth.
          S. DAVY. I have but two in mine.
          GOS. So sparing and so wary?
        What, then, could vex his father so?
          S. ALEX. O, a woman!
          SEB. A flesh-fly, that can vex any man.
          S. ALEX. A scurvy woman,
        On whom the passionate old man swore he doated;
        A creature, saith he, nature hath brought forth
        To mock the sex of woman. It is a thing
        One knows not how to name: her birth began
        Ere she was all made: ’tis woman more than man,
        Man more than woman; and, which to none can hap,
        The sun gives her two shadows to one shape;
        Nay, more, let this strange thing walk, stand, or sit,
        No blazing star draws more eyes after it.
          S. DAVY. A monster! ’tis some monster!
          S. ALEX. She’s a varlet.
          SEB. Now is my cue to bristle.              [_Aside._
          S. ALEX. A naughty pack.[961]
          SEB. ’Tis false!
          S. ALEX. Ha, boy?
          SEB. ’Tis false!
          S. ALEX. What’s false? I say she’s naught.
          SEB. I say, that tongue
        That dares speak so, but yours, sticks in the throat
        Of a rank villain: set yourself aside——
          S. ALEX. So, sir, what then?
          SEB. Any here else had lied.—
        I think I shall fit you.                      [_Aside._
          S. ALEX. Lie?
          SEB. Yes.
          S. DAVY. Doth this concern him?
          S. ALEX. Ah, sirrah-boy,
        Is your blood heated? boils it? are you stung?
        I’ll pierce you deeper yet.—O my dear friends,
        I am that wretched father! this that son,
        That sees his ruin, yet headlong on doth run.
          S. ADAM. Will you love such a poison?
          S. DAVY. Fie, fie.
          SEB. You’re all mad.
          S. ALEX. Thou’rt sick at heart, yet feel’st it not: of
             all these,
        What gentleman but thou, knowing his disease
        Mortal, would shun the cure!—O master Greenwit,
        Would you to such an idol bow?
          GREEN. Not I, sir.
          S. ALEX. Here’s master Laxton; has he mind to a woman
        As thou hast?
          LAX. No, not I, sir.
          S. ALEX. Sir, I know it.
          LAX. Their good parts are so rare, their bad so
             common,
        I will have nought to do with any woman.
          S. DAVY. ’Tis well done, master Laxton.
          S. ALEX. O thou cruel boy,
        Thou wouldst with lust an old man’s life destroy!
        Because thou see’st I’m half-way in my grave,
        Thou shovel’st dust upon me: would thou might’st have
        Thy wish, most wicked, most unnatural!
          S. DAVY. Why, sir, ’tis thought sir Guy Fitzallard’s
             daughter
        Shall wed your son Sebastian.
          S. ALEX. Sir Davy Dapper,
        I have upon my knees woo’d this fond[962] boy
        To take that virtuous maiden.
          SEB. Hark you; a word, sir.
        You on your knees have curs’d that virtuous maiden,
        And me for loving her; yet do you now
        Thus baffle[963] me to my face: wear not your knees
        In such entreats; give me Fitzallard’s daughter.
          S. ALEX. I’ll give thee rats-bane rather.
          SEB. Well, then, you know
        What dish I mean to feed upon.
          S. ALEX. Hark, gentlemen! he swears
        To have this cut-purse drab, to spite my gall.
          ALL. Master Sebastian——
          SEB. I am deaf to you all.
        I’m so bewitch’d, so bound to my desires,
        Tears, prayers, threats, nothing can quench out those
           fires
        That burn within me.                           [_Exit._
          S. ALEX. Her blood shall quench it, then.—  [_Aside._
        Lose him not; O dissuade him, gentlemen!
          S. DAVY. He shall be wean’d, I warrant you.
          S. ALEX. Before his eyes
        Lay down his shame, my grief, his miseries.
          ALL. No more, no more; away!
                          [_Exeunt all but_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE.

          S. ALEX. I wash a negro,
        Losing both pains and cost: but take thy flight,
        I’ll be most near thee when I’m least in sight.
        Wild buck, I’ll hunt thee breathless: thou shalt run on,
        But I will turn thee when I’m not thought upon.—

                   _Enter_ TRAPDOOR _with a letter_.

          Now, sirrah, what are you? leave your ape’s tricks, and
        speak.
          TRAP. A letter from my captain to your worship.
          S. ALEX. O, O, now I remember; ’tis to prefer thee into
        my service.
          TRAP. To be a shifter under your worship’s nose of a
        clean trencher, when there’s a good bit upon’t.
          S. ALEX. Troth, honest fellow—Hum—ha—let me see—
        This knave shall be the axe to hew that down
        At which I stumble; has a face that promiseth
        Much of a villain: I will grind his wit,
        And, if the edge prove fine, make use of it. [_Aside._
        Come hither, sirrah: canst thou be secret, ha?
          TRAP. As two crafty attorneys plotting the undoing
        of their clients.
          S. ALEX. Didst never, as thou’st walk’d about this
             town,
        Hear of a wench call’d Moll, mad, merry Moll?
          TRAP. Moll Cutpurse, sir?
          S. ALEX. The same; dost thou know her, then?
          TRAP. As well as I know ’twill rain upon Simon
        and Jude’s day next: I will sift all the taverns
        i’ th’ city, and drink half pots with all the
           watermen[964]
        a’ th’ Bank-side, but, if you will, sir, I’ll find
        her out.

          S. ALEX. That task is easy; do’t then: hold thy hand
             up.
        What’s this? is’t burnt?
          TRAP. No, sir, no; a little singed with making
        fireworks.

          S. ALEX. There’s money, spend it; that being spent,
             fetch more.                        [_Gives money._
          TRAP. O sir, that all the poor soldiers in England had
        such a leader! For fetching, no water-spaniel is like
        me.

          S. ALEX. This wench we speak of strays so from her
             kind,
        Nature repents she made her: ’tis a mermaid
        Has tol’d my son to shipwreck.
          TRAP. I’ll cut her comb for you.

          S. ALEX. I’ll tell out gold for thee, then. Hunt her
             forth,
        Cast out a line hung full of silver hooks
        To catch her to thy company: deep spendings
        May draw her that’s most chaste to a man’s bosom.
          TRAP. The gingling of golden bells, and a good fool with
        a hobbyhorse, will draw all the whores i’ th’ town to
        dance in a morris.

          S. ALEX. Or rather, for that’s best (they say
             sometimes
        She goes in breeches), follow her as her man.
          TRAP. And when her breeches are off, she shall follow
        me.
          S. ALEX. Beat all thy brains to serve her.
          TRAP. Zounds, sir, as country wenches beat cream till
        butter comes.

          S. ALEX. Play thou the subtle spider; weave fine nets
        To ensnare her very life.
          TRAP. Her life?

          S. ALEX. Yes; suck
        Her heart-blood, if thou canst: twist thou but cords
        To catch her, I’ll find law to hang her up.
          TRAP. Spoke like a worshipful bencher!

          S. ALEX. Trace all her steps: at this she-fox’s den
        Watch what lambs enter; let me play the shepherd
        To save their throats from bleeding, and cut hers.
          TRAP. This is the goll[965] shall do’t.

          S. ALEX. Be firm, and gain me
        Ever thine own: this done, I entertain thee.
        How is thy name?
          TRAP. My name, sir, is Ralph Trapdoor, honest Ralph.

          S. ALEX. Trapdoor, be like thy name, a dangerous step
        For her to venture on; but unto me——
          TRAP. As fast as your sole to your boot or shoe, sir.

          S. ALEX. Hence, then; be little seen here as thou
             canst;
        I’ll still be at thine elbow.
          TRAP. The trapdoor’s set.
        Moll, if you budge, you’re gone: this me shall crown;
        A roaring boy[966] the roaring girl puts down.
          S. ALEX. God-a-mercy, lose no time.        [_Exeunt._


                            ACT II. SCENE I.

          _Three shops open in a rank: the first an apothecary’s
            shop, the next a feather-shop, the third a
            sempster’s shop_; MISTRESS GALLIPOT _in the first_,
            MISTRESS TILTYARD _in the next_, OPENWORK _and_
            MISTRESS OPENWORK _in the third_.

                _Enter_ LAXTON, GOSHAWK, _and_ GREENWIT.

          MIS. OPEN. Gentlemen, what is’t you lack?[967] what
        is’t you buy? see fine bands and ruffs, fine lawns, fine
        cambrics: what is’t you lack, gentlemen? what is’t you
        buy?
          LAX. Yonder’s the shop.
          GOS. Is that she?
          LAX. Peace.
          GREEN. She that minces tobacco?[968]
          LAX. Ay; she’s a gentlewoman born, I can tell you,
        though it be her hard fortune now to shred Indian
        pot-herbs.
          GOS. O sir, ’tis many a good woman’s fortune, when her
        husband turns bankrout,[969] to begin with pipes and set
        up again.
          LAX. And, indeed, the raising of the woman is the
        lifting up of the man’s head at all times; if one
        flourish, t’other will bud as fast, I warrant ye.
          GOS. Come, thou’rt familiarly acquainted there, I grope
        that.
          LAX. And[970] you grope no better i’ th’ dark, you may
        chance lie i’ th’ ditch when you’re drunk.
          GOS. Go, thou’rt a mystical lecher!
          LAX. I will not deny but my credit may take up an ounce
        of pure smoke.
          GOS. May take up an ell of pure smock! away, go! ’Tis
        the closest striker![971] life, I think he commits
        venery forty foot deep; no man’s aware on’t. I, like a
        palpable smockster, go to work so openly with the
        tricks of art, that I’m as apparently seen as a naked
        boy in a phial;[972] and were it not for a gift of
        treachery that I have in me, to betray my friend when
        he puts most trust in me—mass, yonder he is too!—and
        by his injury to make good my access to her, I should
        appear as defective in courting as a farmer’s son the
        first day of his feather, that doth nothing at court
        but woo the hangings and glass windows for a month
        together, and some broken waiting-woman for ever
        after. I find those imperfections in my venery, that
        were’t not for flattery and falsehood, I should want
        discourse and impudence; and he that wants impudence
        among women is worthy to be kicked out at bed’s feet.
        He shall not see me yet.                      [_Aside._
          GREEN. Troth, this is finely shred.
          LAX. O, women are the best mincers.
          MIS. G. ’Thad been a good phrase for a cook’s wife, sir.
          LAX. But ’twill serve generally, like the front of a new
        almanac, as thus:—calculated for the meridian of cooks’
        wives, but generally for all Englishwomen.
          MIS. G. Nay, you shall ha’t, sir; I have filled it for
        you.                        [_She puts it to the fire._
          LAX. The pipe’s in a good hand, and I wish mine always
        so.
          GREEN. But not to be used a’ that fashion.
          LAX. O, pardon me, sir, I understand no French. I pray,
        be covered. Jack, a pipe of rich smoke!
          GOS. Rich smoke? that’s sixpence a pipe, is’t?
          GREEN. To me, sweet lady.
          MIS. G. Be not forgetful; respect my credit; seem
        strange: art and wit make[973] a fool of suspicion;
        pray, be wary.
          LAX. Push![974] I warrant you.—Come, how is’t, gallants?
          GREEN. Pure and excellent.
          LAX. I thought ’twas good, you were grown so silent: you
        are like those that love not to talk at victuals, though
        they make a worse noise i’ th’ nose than a common
        fiddler’s ’prentice, and discourse a whole supper with
        snuffling.—I must speak a word with you anon.
          MIS. G. Make your way wisely, then.
          GOS. O, what else, sir? he’s perfection itself; full of
        manners, but not an acre of ground belonging to ’em.
          GREEN. Ay, and full of form; has ne’er a good stool in’s
        chamber.
          GOS. But above all, religious; he preyeth daily upon
        elder brothers.
          GREEN. And valiant above measure; has run three streets
        from a sergeant.
          LAX. Puh, puh.    [_He blows tobacco in their faces._
          GREEN. O, puh!
          GOS. Ho, ho!
          LAX. So, so.
          MIS. G. What’s the matter now, sir?
          LAX. I protest I’m in extreme want of money; if you can
        supply me now with any means, you do me the greatest
        pleasure, next to the bounty of your love, as ever poor
        gentleman tasted.
          MIS. G. What’s the sum would pleasure ye, sir? though
        you deserve nothing less at my hands.
          LAX. Why, ’tis but for want of opportunity, thou
        knowest.—I put her off with opportunity still: by this
        light, I hate her, but for means to keep me in fashion
        with gallants; for what I take from her, I spend upon
        other wenches; bear her in hand[975] still: she has wit
        enough to rob her husband, and I ways enough to consume
        the money. [_Aside._]—Why, how now? what, the chincough?
          GOS. Thou hast the cowardliest trick to come before a
        man’s face, and strangle him ere he be aware! I could
        find in my heart to make a quarrel in earnest.
          LAX. Pox, and[976] thou dost—thou knowest I never use to
        fight with my friends—thou’ll but lose thy labour in’t.—
        Jack Dapper!

                    _Enter_ JACK DAPPER _and_ GULL.

          GREEN. Monsieur Dapper, I dive down to your ancles.
          J. DAP. Save ye, gentlemen, all three in a peculiar
        salute.
          GOS. He were ill to make a lawyer; he despatches three
        at once.
          LAX. So, well said.—But is this[977] of the same
        tobacco, mistress Gallipot?

          MIS. G. The same you had at first, sir.
          LAX. I wish it no better: this will serve to drink[978]
        at my chamber.
          GOS. Shall we taste a pipe on’t?
          LAX. Not of this, by my troth, gentlemen, I have sworn
        before you.
          GOS. What, not Jack Dapper?
          LAX. Pardon me, sweet Jack; I’m sorry I made such a rash
        oath, but foolish oaths must stand: where art going,
        Jack?
          J. DAP. Faith, to buy one feather.
          LAX. One feather? the fool’s peculiar still.
                                                      [_Aside._
          J. DAP. Gull.
          GULL. Master?
          J. DAP. Here’s three halfpence for your ordinary, boy;
        meet me an hour hence in Paul’s.[979]
          GULL. How? three single halfpence? life, this will
        scarce serve a man in sauce, a halp’orth of mustard, a
        halp’orth of oil, and a halp’orth of vinegar,—what’s
        left then for the pickle herring? This shews like small
        beer i’ th’ morning after a great surfeit of wine
        o’ernight: he could spend his three pound last night in
        a supper amongst girls and brave bawdyhouse boys: I
        thought his pockets cackled not for nothing: these are
        the eggs of three pound, I’ll go sup ’em up presently.
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          LAX. Eight, nine, ten angels:[980] good wench, i’faith,
        and one that loves darkness well; she puts out a candle
        with the best tricks of any drugster’s wife in England:
        but that which mads her, I rail upon opportunity still,
        and take no notice on’t. The other night she would needs
        lead me into a room with a candle in her hand to shew me
        a naked picture, where no sooner entered, but the
        candle was sent of an errand: now, I not intending to
        understand her, but, like a puny at the inns of venery,
        called for another light innocently; thus reward I all
        her cunning with simple mistaking. I know she cozens her
        husband to keep me, and I’ll keep her honest as long as
        I can, to make the poor man some part of amends. An
        honest mind of a whoremaster! how think you amongst you?
        What, a fresh pipe? draw in a third man?
          GOS. No, you’re a hoarder, you engross by th’ ounces.
                                        [_At the feather-shop._
          J. DAP. Pooh, I like it not.
          MIS. T. What feather is’t you’d have, sir?
        These are most worn and most in fashion:
        Amongst the beaver gallants, the stone riders,
        The private stage’s audience, the twelvepenny-stool
           gentlemen,[981]
        I can inform you ’tis the general feather.
          J. DAP. And therefore I mislike it: tell me of
             general!
        Now, a continual Simon and Jude’s rain
        Beat all your feathers as flat down as pancakes!
        Shew me—a—spangled feather.
          MIS. T. O, to go a-feasting with;
        You’d have it for a hench-boy,[982] you shall.
                                     [_At the sempster’s shop._
          OPEN. Mass, I had quite forgot!
        His honour’s footman was here last night, wife;
        Ha’ you done with my lord’s shirt?
          MIS. O. What’s that to you, sir?
        I was this morning at his honour’s lodging,
        Ere such a snake as you crept out of your shell.
          OPEN. O, ’twas well done, good wife!
          MIS. O. I hold it better, sir,
        Than if you had done’t yourself.
          OPEN. Nay, so say I:
        But is the countess’s smock almost done, mouse?[983]
          MIS. O. Here lies the cambric, sir; but wants, I fear
             me.
          OPEN. I’ll resolve[984] you of that presently.
          MIS. O. Heyday! O audacious groom!
        Dare you presume to noble women’s linen?
        Keep you your yard to measure shepherds’ holland:
        I must confine you, I see that.
                                        [_At the tobacco-shop._
          GOS. What say you to this gear?[985]
          LAX. I dare the arrant’st critic in tobacco
        To lay one fault upon’t.

              _Enter_ MOLL _in a frieze jerkin and a black
                            saveguard_.[986]

          GOS. Life, yonder’s Moll!
          LAX. Moll! which Moll?
          GOS. Honest Moll.
          LAX. Prithee, let’s call her.—Moll!
          GOS. Moll, Moll!
          GREEN. Pist, Moll![987]
          MOLL. How now? what’s the matter?
          GOS. A pipe of good tobacco, Moll?
          MOLL. I cannot stay.
          GOS. Nay, Moll, pooh, prithee, hark; but one word,
        i’faith.
          MOLL. Well, what is’t?
          GREEN. Prithee, come hither, sirrah.
          LAX. Heart, I would give but too much money to be
        nibbling with that wench! life, sh’as the spirit of four
        great parishes, and a voice that will drown all the
        city! Methinks a brave captain might get all his
        soldiers upon her, and ne’er be beholding[988] to a
        company of Mile-end milksops, if he could come on and
        come off quick enough: such a Moll were a marrow-bone
        before an Italian; he would cry _buona roba_[989] till
        his ribs were nothing but bone. I’ll lay hard siege to
        her: money is that aquafortis that eats into many a
        maidenhead; where the walls are flesh and blood, I’ll
        ever pierce through with a golden augre.      [_Aside._
          GOS. Now, thy judgment, Moll? is’t not good?
          MOLL. Yes, faith, ’tis very good tobacco.—How do you
        sell an ounce?—Farewell.—God b’i’ you, mistress
        Gallipot.
          GOS. Why, Moll, Moll!
          MOLL. I cannot stay now, i’faith: I am going to buy a
        shag-ruff; the shop will be shut in presently.
          GOS. ’Tis the maddest fantasticalest girl! I never knew
        so much flesh and so much nimbleness put together.
          LAX. She slips from one company to another, like a fat
        eel between a Dutchman’s fingers.—I’ll watch my time for
        her.                 [_Aside._
          MIS. G. Some will not stick to say she is a man,
        And some, both man and woman.

        f LAX. That were excellent: she might first cuckold the
        husband, and then make him do as much for the wife.
                                        [_At the feather-shop._
          MOLL. Save you; how does mistress Tiltyard?
          J. DAP. Moll!
          MOLL. Jack Dapper!
          J. DAP. How dost, Moll?
          MOLL. I’ll tell thee by and by; I go but to th’ next
        shop.
          J. DAP. Thou shalt find me here this hour about a
        feather.
          MOLL. Nay, and[990] a feather hold you in play a whole
        hour, a goose will last you all the days of your life.—
        Let me see a good shag-ruff. [_At the sempster’s
        shop._
          OPEN. Mistress Mary, that shalt thou, i’faith, and the
        best in the shop.
          MIS. O. How now? greetings! love-terms, with a pox,
        between you! have I found out one of your haunts? I send
        you for hollands, and you’re i’ th’ low countries, with
        a mischief. I’m served with good ware by th’ shift; that
        makes it lie dead so long upon my hands: I were as good
        shut up shop, for when I open it I take nothing.
          OPEN. Nay, and you fall a-ringing once, the devil cannot
        stop you.—I’ll out of the belfry as fast as I can, Moll.
                                                    [_Retires._
          MIS. O. Get you from my shop!
          MOLL. I come to buy.
          MIS. O. I’ll sell ye nothing; I warn ye my house and
        shop.
          MOLL. You, goody Openwork, you that prick out a poor
             living,
        And sew[991] many a bawdy skin-coat together;
        Thou private pandress between shirt and smock;
        I wish thee for a minute but a man,
        Thou shouldst ne’er use more shapes; but as thou art,
        I pity my revenge. Now my spleen’s up,
        I would not mock it willingly.—

           _Enter a Fellow, with a long rapier by his side._

                                        Ha! be thankful;
        Now I forgive thee.
          MIS. O. Marry, hang thee, I never asked forgiveness in
        my life.
          MOLL. You, goodman swine’s face!
          FEL. What, will you murder me?
          MOLL. You remember, slave, how you abused me t’other
        night in a tavern.
          FEL. Not I, by this light!
          MOLL. No, but by candle-light you did: you have tricks
        to save your oaths; reservations have you? and I have
        reserved somewhat for you [_strikes him_]. As you like
        that, call for more; you know the sign again.
          FEL. Pox on’t, had I brought any company along with me
        to have borne witness on’t, ’twould ne’er have grieved
        me; but to be struck and nobody by, ’tis my ill fortune
        still. Why, tread upon a worm, they say ’twill turn
        tail; but indeed a gentleman should have more manners.
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          LAX. Gallantly performed, i’faith, Moll, and manfully! I
        love thee for ever for’t: base rogue, had he offered but
        the least counter-buff, by this hand, I was prepared for
        him!
          MOLL. You prepared for him? why should you be prepared
        for him? was he any more than a man?
          LAX. No, nor so much by a yard and a handful, London
        measure.
          MOLL. Why do you speak this then? do you think I cannot
        ride a stone-horse, unless one lead him by th’ snaffle?
          LAX. Yes, and sit him bravely; I know thou canst, Moll:
        ’twas but an honest mistake through love, and I’ll make
        amends for’t any way. Prithee, sweet, plump Moll, when
        shall thou and I go out a’ town together?
          MOLL. Whither? to Tyburn, prithee?
          LAX. Mass, that’s out a’ town indeed: thou hangest so
        many jests upon thy friends still! I mean honestly to
        Brainford,[992] Staines, or Ware.
          MOLL. What to do there?
          LAX. Nothing but be merry and lie together: I’ll hire a
        coach with four horses.
          MOLL. I thought ’twould be a beastly journey. You may
        leave out one well; three horses will serve, if I play
        the jade myself.
          LAX. Nay, push,[993] thou’rt such another kicking wench!
        Prithee, be kind, and let’s meet.
          MOLL. ’Tis hard but we shall meet, sir.
          LAX. Nay, but appoint the place then; there’s ten
        angels[994] in fair gold, Moll: you see I do not trifle
        with you; do but say thou wilt meet me, and I’ll have a
        coach ready for thee.
          MOLL. Why, here’s my hand, I’ll meet you, sir.
          LAX. O good gold! [_Aside._]—The place, sweet Moll?
          MOLL. It shall be your appointment.
          LAX. Somewhat near Holborn, Moll.
          MOLL. In Gray’s-Inn-Fields then.
          LAX. A match.
          MOLL. I’ll meet you there.
          LAX. The hour?
          MOLL. Three.
          LAX. That will be time enough to sup at Brainford.
          OPEN. I am of such a nature, sir, I cannot endure the
        house when she scolds: sh’as a tongue will be heard
        further in a still morning than Saint Antling’s
        bell.[995] She rails upon me for foreign wenching, that
        I being a freeman must needs keep a whore i’ th’
        suburbs, and seek to impoverish the liberties. When we
        fall out, I trouble you still to make all whole with my
        wife.
          GOS. No trouble at all; ’tis a pleasure to me to join
        things together.
          OPEN. Go thy ways, I do this but to try thy honesty,
        Goshawk. [_Aside._]
                                        [_At the feather-shop._
          J. DAP. How likest thou this, Moll?
          MOLL. O, singularly; you’re fitted now for a bunch.—He
        looks for all the world, with those spangled feathers,
        like a nobleman’s bed-post. The purity of your wench
        would I fain try; she seems like Kent unconquered, and,
        I believe, as many wiles are in her. O, the gallants of
        these times are shallow lechers! they put not their
        courtship home enough to a wench: ’tis impossible to
        know what woman is throughly honest, because she’s ne’er
        thoroughly tried; I am of that certain belief, there are
        more queans in this town of their own making than of any
        man’s provoking: where lies the slackness then? many a
        poor soul would down, and there’s nobody will push ’em:

        Women are courted, but ne’er soundly tried,
        As many walk in spurs that never ride.        [_Aside._
                                     [_At the sempster’s shop._
          MIS. O. O, abominable!
          GOS. Nay, more, I tell you in private, he keeps a whore
        i’ th’ suburbs.
          MIS. O. O spittle[996] dealing! I came to him a
        gentlewoman born: I’ll shew you mine arms when you
        please, sir.
          GOS. I had rather see your legs, and begin that way.
                                                      [_Aside._
          MIS. O. ’Tis well known he took me from a lady’s
        service, where I was well beloved of the steward: I had
        my Latin tongue, and a spice of the French, before I
        came to him; and now doth he keep a suburbian whore
        under my nostrils?
          GOS. There’s ways enough to cry quit with him: hark in
        thine ear.                             [_Whispers her._
          MIS. O. There’s a friend worth a million!
          MOLL. I’ll try one spear against your chastity, mistress
        Tiltyard, though it prove too short by the burgh.[997]
                                                      [_Aside._

                           _Enter_ TRAPDOOR.

          TRAP. Mass, here she is: I’m bound already to serve
        her, though it be but a sluttish trick. [_Aside._]—Bless
        my hopeful young mistress with long life and great
        limbs; send her the upper hand of all bailiffs and their
        hungry adherents!
          MOLL. How now? what art thou?
          TRAP. A poor ebbing gentleman, that would gladly wait
        for the young flood of your service.
          MOLL. My service? what should move you to offer your
        service to me, sir?
          TRAP. The love I bear to your heroic spirit and
        masculine womanhood.
          MOLL. So, sir! put case we should retain you to us, what
        parts are there in you for a gentlewoman’s service?
          TRAP. Of two kinds, right worshipful; moveable and
        immoveable—moveable to run of errands, and immoveable to
        stand when you have occasion to use me.
          MOLL. What strength have you?
          TRAP. Strength, mistress Moll? I have gone up into a
        steeple, and stayed the great bell as’t has been
        ringing; stopt a windmill going——
          MOLL. And never struck down yourself?
          TRAP. Stood as upright as I do at this present.
                                    [MOLL _trips up his heels_.
          MOLL. Come, I pardon you for this; it shall be no
        disgrace to you: I have struck up the heels of the high
        German’s size'[998] ere now. What, not stand?
          TRAP. I am of that nature, where I love, I’ll be at my
        mistress’ foot to do her service.
          MOLL. Why, well said; but say your mistress should
        receive injury, have you the spirit of fighting in you?
        durst you second her?
          TRAP. Life, I have kept a bridge myself, and drove seven
        at a time before me!
          MOLL. Ay?
          TRAP. But they were all Lincolnshire bullocks, by my
        troth.                                        [_Aside._
          MOLL. Well, meet me in Gray’s Inn Fields between three
        and four this afternoon, and, upon better consideration,
        we’ll retain you.
          TRAP. I humbly thank your good mistresship.—I’ll crack
        your neck for this kindness.          [_Aside, & exit._
          LAX. Remember three.      [MOLL _meets_ LAXTON, _and_
          MOLL. Nay, if I fail you, hang me.
          LAX. Good wench, i’faith!
          MOLL. Who’s this?                    [_then_ OPENWORK.
          OPEN. ’Tis I, Moll.
          MOLL. Prithee, tend thy shop and prevent bastards.
          OPEN. We’ll have a pint of the same wine,[999] i’faith,
        Moll. [_Exit with_ MOLL.]                [_Bell rings._
          GOS. Hark, the bell rings! come, gentlemen. Jack Dapper,
        where shall’s all munch?
          J. DAP. I am for Parker’s ordinary.
          LAX. He’s a good guest to’m, he deserves his board; he
        draws all the gentlemen in a term-time thither. We’ll be
        your followers, Jack; lead the way.—Look you, by my
        faith, the fool has feathered his nest well.
        [_Exeunt_ JACK DAPPER, LAXTON, GOSHAWK, _and_ GREENWIT.

            _Enter_ GALLIPOT, TILTYARD, _and Servants, with
                      water-spaniels and a duck_.

          TILT. Come, shut up your shops. Where’s master
        Openwork?
          MIS. G. Nay, ask not me, master Tiltyard.
          TILT. Where’s his water-dog? puh—pist[1000]—hur—hur—
        pist!
          GAL. Come, wenches, come; we’re going all to
        Hogsdon.
          MIS. G. To Hogsdon, husband?
          GAL. Ay, to Hogsdon, pigsnie.[1001]
          MIS. G. I’m not ready, husband.
          GAL. Faith, that’s well—hum—pist—pist.—
                                   [_Spits in the dog’s mouth._
        Come, mistress Openwork, you are so long!
          MIS. O. I have no joy of my life, master Gallipot.
          GAL. Push,[1002] let your boy lead his water-spaniel
        along, and we’ll shew you the bravest sport at Parlous
        Pond.[1003]—Hey, trug, hey, trug, hey, trug![1004]
        here’s the best duck in England, except my wife; hey,
        hey, hey! fetch, fetch, fetch!—
        Come, let’s away:[1005]
        Of all the year this is the sportful’st day.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                      _Enter_ SEBASTIAN WENGRAVE.

          SEB. If a man have a free will, where should the use
        More perfect shine than in his will to love?
        All creatures have their liberty in that,

             _Enter behind_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE _listening._

        Though else kept under servile yoke and fear;
        The very bond-slave has his freedom there.
        Amongst a world of creatures voic’d and silent,
        Must my desires wear fetters?—Yea, are you
        So near? then I must break with my heart’s truth,
        Meet grief at a back way.—Well: why, suppose
        The two-leav’d[1006] tongues of slander or of truth
        Pronounce Moll loathsome; if before my love
        She appear fair, what injury have I?
        I have the thing I like: in all things else
        Mine own eye guides me, and I find ’em prosper.
        Life! what should ail it now? I know that man
        Ne’er truly loves,—if he gainsay’t he lies,—
        That winks and marries with his father’s eyes:
        I’ll keep mine own wide open.

         _Enter_ MOLL, _and a Porter with a viol on his back_.

          S. ALEX. Here’s brave wilfulness!
        A made match! here she comes; they met a’ purpose.
                                                      [_Aside._
          POR. Must I carry this great fiddle to your chamber,
        mistress Mary?
          MOLL. Fiddle, goodman hog-rubber? Some of these porters
        bear so much for others, they have no time to carry wit
        for themselves.
          POR. To your own chamber, mistress Mary?
          MOLL. Who’ll hear an ass speak? whither else, goodman
        pageant-bearer? They’re people of the worst memories!
                                                [_Exit Porter._
          SEB. Why, ’twere too great a burden, love, to have
             them
        Carry things in their minds and a’ their backs together.
          MOLL. Pardon me, sir, I thought not you so near.
          S. ALEX. So, so, so!                        [_Aside._
          SEB. I would be nearer to thee, and in that fashion
        That makes the best part of all creatures honest:
        No otherwise I wish it.
          MOLL. Sir, I am so poor to requite you, you must look
        for nothing but thanks of me: I have no humour to marry;
        I love to lie a’ both sides a’ th’ bed myself: and
        again, a’ th’ other side, a wife, you know, ought to be
        obedient, but I fear me I am too headstrong to obey;
        therefore I’ll ne’er go about it. I love you so well,
        sir, for your good will, I’d be loath you should repent
        your bargain after; and therefore we’ll ne’er come
        together at first. I have the head now of myself, and am
        man enough for a woman: marriage is but a chopping and
        changing, where a maiden loses one head, and has a worse
        i’ th’ place.
            S. ALEX. The most comfortablest answer from a roaring
             girl
        That ever mine ears drunk in!                   [_Aside._
          SEB. This were enough
        Now to affright a fool for ever from thee,
        When ’tis the music that I love thee for.
          S. ALEX. There’s a boy spoils all again!     [_Aside._
          MOLL. Believe it, sir, I am not of that disdainful
        temper but I could love you faithfully.
          S. ALEX. A pox on you for that word! I like you not
           now,
        You’re a cunning roarer, I see that already.  [_Aside._
          MOLL. But sleep upon this once more, sir; you may chance
        shift a mind to-morrow: be not too hasty to wrong
        yourself; never while you live, sir, take a wife
        running; many have run out at heels that have done’t.
        You see, sir, I speak against myself; and if every woman
        would deal with their suitor so honestly, poor younger
        brothers would not be so often gulled with old cozening
        widows, that turn o’er all their wealth in trust to some
        kinsman, and make the poor gentleman work hard for a
        pension. Fare you well, sir.
          SEB. Nay, prithee, one word more.
          S. ALEX. How do I wrong this girl! she puts him off
             still.    [_Aside._
          MOLL. Think upon this in cold blood, sir: you make as
        much haste as if you were a-going upon a sturgeon
        voyage. Take deliberation, sir; never choose a wife as
        if you were going to Virginia.[1007]
          SEB. And so[1008] we parted: my too-cursed fate!
          S. ALEX. She is but cunning, gives him longer time
             in’t.                                    [_Aside._

                            _Enter Tailor._

          TAI. Mistress Moll, mistress Moll! so ho, ho, so ho!
          MOLL. There, boy, there, boy! what dost thou go
        a-hawking after me with a red clout on thy finger?
          TAI. I forgot to take measure on you for your new
        breeches.
          S. ALEX. Hoyda, breeches? what, will he marry a monster
        with two trinkets? what age is this! if the wife go in
        breeches, the man must wear long coats[1009] like a
        fool.                                         [_Aside._
          MOLL. What fiddling’s here! would not the old pattern
        have served your turn?
          TAI. You change the fashion: you say you’ll have the
        great Dutch slop,[1010] mistress Mary.
          MOLL. Why, sir, I say so still.
          TAI. Your breeches, then, will take up a yard more.
          MOLL. Well, pray, look it be put in then.
          TAI. It shall stand round and full, I warrant you.
          MOLL. Pray, make ’em easy enough.
          TAI. I know my fault now, t’other was somewhat stiff
        between the legs; I’ll make these open enough, I warrant
        you.
          S. ALEX. Here’s good gear towards![1011] I have brought
        up my son to marry a Dutch slop and a French doublet; a
        codpiece daughter!                            [_Aside._
          TAI. So, I have gone as far as I can go.
          MOLL. Why, then, farewell.
          TAI. If you go presently to your chamber, mistress Mary,
        pray, send me the measure of your thigh by some honest
        body.
          MOLL. Well, sir, I’ll send it by a porter presently.
                  [_Exit._
          TAI. So you had need, it is a lusty one; both of them
        would make any porter’s back ache in England.
                                                       [_Exit._
          SEB. I have examin’d the best part of man,
        Reason and judgment; and in love, they tell me,
        They leave me uncontroll’d: he that is sway’d
        By an unfeeling blood, past heat of love,
        His spring-time must needs err; his watch ne’er goes
           right
        That sets his dial by a rusty clock.
          S. ALEX. [_coming forward_] So; and which is that
             rusty clock, sir, you?
          SEB. The clock at Ludgate, sir; it ne’er goes true.
          S. ALEX. But thou go’st falser; not thy father’s cares
        Can keep thee right: when that insensible work
        Obeys the workman’s art, lets off the hour,
        And stops again when time is satisfied:
        But thou runn’st on; and judgment, thy main wheel,
        Beats by all stops, as if the work would break,
        Begun with long pains for a minute’s ruin:
        Much like a suffering man brought up with care,
        At last bequeath’d to shame and a short prayer.
          SEB. I taste you bitterer than I can deserve, sir.
          S. ALEX. Who has bewitch[’d] thee, son? what devil or
             drug
        Hath wrought upon the weakness of thy blood,
        And betray’d all her hopes to ruinous folly?
        O, wake from drowsy and enchanted shame,
        Wherein thy soul sits, with a golden dream
        Flatter’d and poison’d! I am old, my son;
        O, let me prevail quickly!
        For I have weightier business of mine own
        Than to chide thee: I must not to my grave
        As a drunkard to his bed, whereon he lies
        Only to sleep, and never cares to rise:
        Let me despatch in time; come no more near her.
          SEB. Not honestly? not in the way of marriage?
          S. ALEX. What sayst thou? marriage? in what place? the
             Sessions-house?
        And who shall give the bride, prithee? an indictment?
          SEB. Sir, now ye take part with the world to wrong
             her.
          S. ALEX. Why, wouldst thou fain marry to be pointed
             at?
        Alas, the number’s great! do not o’erburden’t.
        Why, as good marry a beacon on a hill,
        Which all the country fix their eyes upon,
        As her thy folly doats on. If thou long’st
        To have the story of thy infamous fortunes
        Serve for discourse in ordinaries and taverns,
        Thou’rt in the way; or to confound thy name,
        Keep on, thou canst not miss it; or to strike
        Thy wretched father to untimely coldness,
        Keep the left hand still, it will bring thee to’t.
        Yet, if no tears wrung from thy father’s eyes,
        Nor sighs that fly in sparkles from his sorrows,
        Had power to alter what is wilful in thee,
        Methinks her very name should fright thee from her,
        And never trouble me.
          SEB. Why, is the name of Moll so fatal, sir?
          S. ALEX. Many one,[1012] sir, where suspect is
             enter’d;
        For, seek all London from one end to t’other,
        More whores of that name than of any ten other.
          SEB. What’s that to her? let those blush for
             themselves:
        Can any guilt in others condemn her?
        I’ve vow’d to love her: let all storms oppose me
        That ever beat against the breast of man,
        Nothing but death’s black tempest shall divide us.
          S. ALEX. O, folly that can doat on nought but shame!
          SEB. Put case, a wanton itch runs through one name
        More than another; is that name the worse,
        Where honesty sits possest in’t? it should rather
        Appear more excellent, and deserve more praise,
        When through foul mists a brightness it can raise.
        Why, there are of the devils honest gentlemen
        And well descended, keep an open house,
        And some a’ th’ good man’s[1013] that are arrant knaves.
        He hates unworthily that by rote contemns,
        For the name neither saves nor yet condemns;
        And for her honesty, I’ve made such proof on’t
        In several forms, so nearly watch’d her ways,
        I will maintain that strict against an army,
        Excepting you, my father. Here’s her worst,
        Sh’as a bold spirit that mingles with mankind,
        But nothing else comes near it: and oftentimes
        Through her apparel somewhat shames her birth;
        But she is loose in nothing but in mirth:
        Would all Molls were no worse!
          S. ALEX. This way I toil in vain, and give but
             aim[1014]
        To infamy and ruin: he will fall;
        My blessing cannot stay him: all my joys
        Stand at the brink of a devouring flood,
        And will be wilfully swallow’d, wilfully.
        But why so vain let all these tears be lost?
        I’ll pursue her to shame, and so all’s crost.
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          SEB. He’s gone with some strange purpose, whose effect
        Will hurt me little if he shoot so wide,
        To think I love so blindly: I but feed
        His heart to this match, to draw on the other,
        Wherein my joy sits with a full wish crown’d,
        Only his mood excepted, which must change
        By opposite policies, courses indirect;
        Plain dealing in this world takes no effect.
        This mad girl I’ll acquaint with my intent,
          Get her assistance, make my fortunes known:
        ’Twixt lovers’ hearts she’s a fit instrument,
          And has the art to help them to their own.
        By her advice, for in that craft she’s wise,
        My love and I may meet, spite of all spies.    [_Exit._


                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                          _Gray’s Inn Fields._

                     _Enter_ LAXTON _and Coachman_.

          LAX. Coachman.
          COACH. Here, sir.
          LAX. There’s a tester[1015] more; prithee drive thy
        coach to the hither end of Marybone-park, a fit place
        for Moll to get in.
          COACH. Marybone-park, sir?
          LAX. Ay, it’s in our way, thou knowest.
          COACH. It shall be done, sir.
          LAX. Coachman.
          COACH. Anon, sir.
          LAX. Are we fitted with good phrampel[1016] jades?
          COACH. The best in Smithfield, I warrant you, sir.
          LAX. May we safely take the upper hand of any coached
        velvet cap, or tuftaffety jacket? for they keep a
        vild[1017] swaggering in coaches now-a-days; the
        highways are stopt with them.
          COACH. My life for yours, and baffle[1018] ’em too, sir:
        why, they are the same jades believe it, sir, that have
        drawn all your famous whores to Ware.
          LAX. Nay, then they know their business; they need no
        more instructions.
          COACH. They’re so used to such journeys, sir, I never
        use whip to ’em; for if they catch but the scent of a
        wench once, they run like devils.        [_Exit._[1019]
          LAX. Fine Cerberus! that rogue will have the start of a
        thousand ones; for whilst others trot a’ foot, he’ll
        ride prancing to hell upon a coach-horse. Stay, ’tis now
        about the hour of her appointment, but yet I see her
        not. [_The clock strikes three._] Hark! what’s this?
        one, two, three: three by the clock at Savoy; this is
        the hour, and Gray’s Inn Fields the place, she swore
        she’d meet me. Ha! yonder’s two Inns-a’-court men with
        one wench, but that’s not she; they walk toward
        Islington out of my way. I see none yet drest like her;
        I must look for a shag ruff, a freize jerken, a short
        sword, and a safeguard,[1020] or I get none. Why, Moll,
        prithee, make haste, or the coachman will curse us anon.

                   _Enter_ MOLL, _dressed as a man_.

          MOLL. O, here’s my gentleman! If they would keep their
        days as well with their mercers as their hours with
        their harlots, no bankrout[1021] would give seven score
        pound for a sergeant’s place; for would you know a
        catchpoll rightly derived, the corruption of a citizen
        is the generation of a sergeant. How his eye hawks for
        venery! [_Aside._]—Come, are you ready, sir?
          LAX. Ready? for what, sir?
          MOLL. Do you ask that now, sir?
        Why was this meeting ’pointed?
          LAX. I thought you mistook me, sir: you seem to be some
        young barrister;
        I have no suit in law, all my land’s sold;
        I praise heaven for’t, ’t has rid me of much trouble.
          MOLL. Then I must wake you, sir; where stands the
             coach?
          LAX. Who’s this? Moll, honest Moll?
          MOLL. So young, and purblind?
        You’re an old wanton in your eyes, I see that.
          LAX. Thou’rt admirably suited for the Three Pigeons at
        Brainford.[1022] I’ll swear I knew thee not.
          MOLL. I’ll swear you did not; but you shall know me
             now.
          LAX. No, not here; we shall be spied, i’faith; the coach
        is better: come.
          MOLL. Stay.                     [_Puts off her cloak._
          LAX. What, wilt thou untruss a point,[1023] Moll?
          MOLL. Yes; here’s the point        [_Draws her sword._
        That I untruss; ’t has but one tag, ’t will serve though
        To tie up a rogue’s tongue.
          LAX. How!
          MOLL. There’s the gold
        With which you hir’d your hackney, here’s her pace;
        She racks hard, and perhaps your bones will feel it:
        Ten angels[1024] of mine own I’ve put to thine;
        Win ’em, and wear ’em.
          LAX. Hold, Moll! mistress Mary——
          MOLL. Draw, or I’ll serve an execution on thee,
        Shall lay thee up till doomsday.
          LAX. Draw upon a woman! why, what dost mean, Moll?

          MOLL. To teach thy base thoughts manners: thou’rt one
             of those
        That thinks each woman thy fond flexible whore;
        If she but cast a liberal[1025] eye upon thee,
        Turn back her head, she’s thine; or amongst company
        By chance drink first to thee, then she’s quite gone,
        There is no means to help her: nay, for a need,
        Wilt swear unto thy credulous fellow-lechers,
        That thou art more in favour with a lady
        At first sight than her monkey all her lifetime.
        How many of our sex, by such as thou,
        Have their good thoughts paid with a blasted name
        That never deserv’d loosely, or did trip
        In path of whoredom beyond cup and lip!
        But for the stain of conscience and of soul,
        Better had women fall into the hands
        Of an act silent than a bragging nothing;
        There is no mercy in’t. What durst move you, sir,
        To think me whorish? a name which I’d tear out
        From the high German’s throat,[1026] if it lay
           leiger[1027] there
        To despatch privy slanders against me.
        In thee I defy all men, their worst hates
        And their best flatteries, all their golden witchcrafts,
        With which they entangle the poor spirits of fools,
        Distressed needle-women and trade-fallen wives;
        Fish that must needs bite, or themselves be bitten:
        Such hungry things as these may soon be took
        With a worm fasten’d on a golden hook:
        Those are the lecher’s food, his prey; he watches
        For quarrelling wedlocks[1028] and poor shifting
           sisters;
        ’Tis the best fish he takes. But why, good fisherman,
        Am I thought meat for you, that never yet
        Had angling rod cast towards me? ’cause, you’ll say,
        I’m given to sport, I’m often merry, jest:
        Had mirth no kindred in the world but lust,
        O shame take all her friends then! but howe’er
        Thou and the baser world censure my life,
        I’ll send ’em word by thee, and write so much
        Upon thy breast, ’cause thou shalt bear’t in mind,
        Tell them ’twere base to yield where I have conquer’d;
        I scorn to prostitute myself to a man,
        I that can prostitute a man to me;
        And so I greet thee.
          LAX. Hear me——
          MOLL. Would the spirits
        Of all my sland[er]ers were clasp’d in thine,
        That I might vex an army at one time!    [_They fight._
          LAX. I do repent me; hold!
          MOLL. You’ll die the better Christian then.
          LAX. I do confess I have wronged thee, Moll.
          MOLL. Confession is but poor amends for wrong,
        Unless a rope would follow.
          LAX. I ask thee pardon.
          MOLL. I’m your hir’d whore, sir!
          LAX. I yield both purse and body.
          MOLL. Both are mine,
        And now at my disposing.
          LAX. Spare my life!
          MOLL. I scorn to strike thee basely.
          LAX. Spoke like a noble girl, i’faith!—Heart, I think I
        fight with a familiar,[1029] or the ghost of a fencer.
        Sh’as wounded me gallantly. Call you this a lecherous
        viage?[1030] here’s blood would have served me this
        seven year in broken heads and cut fingers; and it now
        runs all out together. Pox a’ the Three Pigeons![1031] I
        would the coach were here now to carry me to the
        chirurgeon’s.                       [_Aside, and exit._
          MOLL. If I could meet my enemies one by one thus,
        I might make pretty shift with ’em in time,
        And make ’em know she that has wit and spirit,
        May scorn
        To live beholding[1032] to her body for meat;
        Or for apparel, like your common dame,
        That makes shame get her clothes to cover shame.
        Base is that mind that kneels unto her body,
        As if a husband stood in awe on’s wife:
        My spirit shall be mistress of this house
        As long as I have time in’t.—O,

                           _Enter_ TRAPDOOR.

        Here comes my man that would be: ’tis his hour.
        Faith, a good well-set fellow, if his spirit
        Be answerable to his umbles:[1033] he walks stiff,
        But whether he’ll stand to’t stiffly, there’s the point:
        Has a good calf for’t; and ye shall have many a woman
        Choose him she means to make her head by his calf:
        I do not know their tricks in’t. Faith, he seems
        A man without; I’ll try what he’s within.
          TRAP. She told me Gray’s Inn Fields, ’twixt three and
             four;
        I’ll fit her mistress-ship with a piece of service:
        I’m hir’d to rid the town of one mad girl.
                                           [MOLL _jostles him_.
        What a pox ails you, sir?
          MOLL. He begins like a gentleman.
          TRAP. Heart, is the field so narrow, or your eyesight—
        Life, he comes back again!
          MOLL. Was this spoke to me, sir?
          TRAP. I cannot tell, sir.
          MOLL. Go, you’re a coxcomb!
          TRAP. Coxcomb?
          MOLL. You’re a slave!
          TRAP. I hope there’s law for you, sir.
          MOLL. Yea, do you see, sir?         [_Turns his hat._
          TRAP. Heart, this is no good dealing! pray, let me know
        what house you’re of.
          MOLL. One of the Temple, sir.         [_Fillips him._
          TRAP. Mass, so methinks.
          MOLL. And yet sometime I lie about Chick Lane.
          TRAP. I like you the worse because you shift your
        lodging so often: I’ll not meddle with you for that
        trick, sir.
          MOLL. A good shift; but it shall not serve your turn.
          TRAP. You’ll give me leave to pass about my business,
        sir?
          MOLL. Your business? I’ll make you wait on me
        Before I ha’ done, and glad to serve me too.
          TRAP. How, sir? serve you? not if there were no more men
        in England.
          MOLL. But if there were no more women in England,
        I hope you’d wait upon your mistress then?
          TRAP. Mistress?
          MOLL. O, you’re a tried spirit at a push, sir!
          TRAP. What would your worship have me do?
          MOLL. You a fighter!
          TRAP. No, I praise heaven, I had better grace and more
        manners.
          MOLL. As how, I pray, sir?
          TRAP. Life, ’thad been a beastly part of me to have
        drawn my weapons upon my mistress; all the world would
        ’a cried shame of me for that.
          MOLL. Why, but you knew me not.
          TRAP. Do not say so, mistress; I knew you by your wide
        straddle, as well as if I had been in your belly.
          MOLL. Well, we shall try you further; i’ th’ mean time
        We give you entertainment.
          TRAP. Thank your good mistress-ship.
          MOLL. How many suits have you?
          TRAP. No more suits than backs, mistress.
          MOLL. Well, if you deserve, I cast off this, next
             week,
        And you may creep into’t.
          TRAP. Thank your good worship.
          MOLL. Come, follow me to St. Thomas Apostle’s:
        I’ll put a livery cloak upon your back
        The first thing I do.
          TRAP. I follow, my dear mistress.          [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                           GALLIPOT’S _Shop_.

          _Enter_ MISTRESS GALLIPOT _as from supper_, GALLIPOT
                            _following her_.

          GAL. What, Pru! nay, sweet Prudence!
          MIS. G. What a pruing keep you! I think the baby would
        have a teat, it kyes[1034] so. Pray, be not so fond of
        me, leave your city humours; I’m vexed at you, to see
        how like a calf you come bleating after me.
          GAL. Nay, honey Pru, how does your rising up before all
        the table shew, and flinging from my friends so
        uncivilly! fie, Pru, fie! come.
          MIS. G. Then up and ride, i’faith!
          GAL. Up and ride? nay, my pretty Pru, that’s far from my
        thought, duck: why, mouse,[1035] thy mind is nibbling at
        something; what is’t? what lies upon thy stomach?
          MIS. G. Such an ass as you: hoyda, you’re best turn
        midwife, or physician! you’re a ’pothecary already, but
        I’m none of your drugs.
          GAL. Thou art a sweet drug, sweetest Pru, and the more
        thou art pounded, the more precious.
          MIS. G. Must you be prying into a woman’s secrets, say
        ye?
          GAL. Woman’s secrets?
          MIS. G. What! I cannot have a qualm come upon me, but
        your teeth water[1036] till your nose hang over it!
          GAL. It is my love, dear wife.
          MIS. G. Your love? your love is all words; give me
        deeds: I cannot abide a man that’s too fond over me,—so
        cookish! Thou dost not know how to handle a woman in her
        kind.
          GAL. No, Pru? why, I hope I have handled—
          MIS. G. Handle a fool’s head of your own,—fie, fie!
          GAL. Ha, ha, ’tis such a wasp! it does me good now to
        have her s[t]ing me, little rogue!
          MIS. G. Now, fie, how you vex me! I cannot abide these
        apron husbands;[1037] such cotqueans![1038] you overdo
        your things, they become you scurvily.
          GAL. Upon my life she breeds: heaven knows how I have
        strained myself to please her night and day. I wonder
        why we citizens should get children so fretful and
        untoward in the breeding, their fathers being for the
        most part as gentle as milch kine. [_Aside._]—Shall I
        leave thee, my Pru?
          MIS. G. Fie, fie, fie!
          GAL. Thou shalt not be vexed no more, pretty, kind
        rogue; take no cold, sweet Pru.                  [_Exit._
          MIS. G. As your wit has done. Now, master Laxton, shew
        your head; what news from you? would any husband suspect
        that a woman crying, _Buy any scurvy-grass_, should
        bring love-letters amongst her herbs to his wife? pretty
        trick! fine conveyance! had jealousy a thousand eyes, a
        silly woman with scurvy-grass blinds them all.
        Laxton, with bays[1039]
        Crown I thy wit for this, it deserves praise:
        This makes me affect thee more, this proves thee wise:
        ’Lack, what poor shift is love forc’d to devise!—

        To th’ point. [_Reads letter._] _O sweet creature_—a
        sweet beginning!—_pardon my long absence, for thou shalt
        shortly be possessed with my presence: though Demophoon
        was false to Phyllis, I will be to thee as Pan-da-rus
        was to Cres-sida;[1040] though Æneas made an ass of
        Dido, I will die to thee ere I do so. O sweetest
        creature, make much of me! for no man beneath the silver
        moon shall make more of a woman than I do of thee:
        furnish me therefore with thirty pounds; you must do it
        of necessity for me; I languish till I see some comfort
        come from thee. Protesting not to die in thy debt, but
        rather to live, so as hitherto I have and will_,
                          _Thy true Laxton ever_.
        Alas, poor gentleman! troth, I pity him.
        How shall I raise this money? thirty pound!
        ’Tis thirty sure, a 3 before an 0;
        I know his threes too well. My childbed linen,
        Shall I pawn that for him? then if my mark
        Be known, I am undone; it may be thought
        My husband’s bankrout.[1041] Which way shall I turn?
        Laxton, what with my own fears and thy wants,
        I’m like a needle ’twixt two adamants.

                     _Re-enter_ GALLIPOT _hastily_.

          GAL. Nay, nay, wife, the women are all up—Ha! how?
        reading a’ letters? I smell a goose, a couple of capons,
        and a gammon of bacon, from her mother out of the
        country. I hold my life—steal, steal[1042]——  [_Aside._
          MIS. G. O, beshrew your heart!
          GAL. What letter’s that? I’ll see’t.
                                   [MIS. G. _tears the letter_.
          MIS. G. O, would thou hadst no eyes to see the downfal
        Of me and thyself! I am for ever,
        For ever I’m undone!
          GAL. What ails my Pru?
        What paper’s that thou tear’st?
          MIS. G. Would I could tear
        My very heart in pieces! for my soul
        Lies on the rack of shame, that tortures me
        Beyond a woman’s suffering.
          GAL. What means this?
          MIS. G. Had you no other vengeance to throw down,
        But even in height of all my joys——
          GAL. Dear woman——
          MIS. G. When the full sea of pleasure and content
        Seem’d to flow over me?
          GAL. As thou desir’st
        To keep me out of Bedlam, tell what troubles thee!
        Is not thy child at nurse fallen sick, or dead?
          MIS. G. O, no!
          GAL. Heavens bless me! are my barns and houses
        Yonder at Hockley-hole consum’d with fire?
        I can build more, sweet Pru.
          MIS. G. ’Tis worse, ’tis worse!
          GAL. My factor broke? or is the Jonas sunk?
          MIS. G. Would all we had were swallow’d in the waves,
        Rather than both should be the scorn of slaves!
          GAL. I’m at my wit’s end.
          MIS. G. O my dear husband!
        Where[1043] once I thought myself a fixed star,
        Plac’d only in the heaven of thine arms,
        I fear now I shall prove a wanderer.
        O Laxton, Laxton! is it then my fate
        To be by thee o’erthrown?
          GAL. Defend me, wisdom,
        From falling into frenzy! On my knees,
        Sweet Pru, speak; what’s that Laxton, who so heavy
        Lies on thy bosom?
          MIS. G. I shall sure run mad!
          GAL. I shall run mad for company then. Speak to me;
        I’m Gallipot thy husband—Pru—why, Pru!
        Art sick in conscience for some villanous deed
        Thou wert about to act? didst mean to rob me?
        Tush, I forgive thee: hast thou on my bed
        Thrust my soft pillow under another’s head?
        I’ll wink at all faults, Pru: ’las, that’s no more,
        Than what some neighbours near thee have done before!
        Sweet honey Pru, what’s that Laxton?
          MIS. G. O!
          GAL. Out with him!
          MIS. G. O, he’s born to be my undoer!
        This hand, which thou call’st thine, to him was given,
        To him was I made sure[1044] i’ th’ sight of heaven.
          GAL. I never heard this thunder.
          MIS. G. Yes, yes, before
        I was to thee contracted, to him I swore:
        Since last I saw him,[1045] twelve months three times
           told
        The moon hath drawn through her light silver bow;
        For o’er the seas he went, and it was said,
        But rumour lies, that he in France was dead:
        But he’s alive, O he’s alive! he sent
        That letter to me, which in rage I rent;
        Swearing with oaths most damnably to have me,
        Or tear me from this bosom: O heavens, save me!
          GAL. My heart will break; sham’d and undone for ever!
          MIS. G. So black a day, poor wretch, went o’er thee
             never!
          GAL. If thou should’st wrestle with him at the law,
        Thou’rt sure to fall. No odd slight?[1046] no
           prevention?
        I’ll tell him thou’rt with child.
          MIS. G. Umh!
          GAL. Or give out
        One of my men was ta’en a-bed with thee.
          MIS. G. Umh, umh!
          GAL. Before I lose thee, my dear Pru,
        I’ll drive it to that push.
          MIS. G. Worse and worse still;
        You embrace a mischief, to prevent an ill.
          GAL. I’ll buy thee of him, stop his mouth with gold:
        Think’st thou ’twill do?
          MIS. G. O me! heavens grant it would!
        Yet now my senses are set more in tune,
        He writ, as I remember, in his letter,
        That he in riding up and down had spent,
        Ere he could find me, thirty pounds: send that;
        Stand not on thirty with him.
          GAL. Forty, Pru!
        Say thou the word, ’tis done: we venture lives
        For wealth, but must do more to keep our wives.
        Thirty or forty, Pru?
          MIS. G. Thirty, good sweet;
        Of an ill bargain let’s save what we can:
        I’ll pay it him with my tears; he was a man,
        When first I knew him, of a meek spirit,
        All goodness is not yet dried up, I hope.
          GAL. He shall have thirty pound, let that stop all:
        Love’s sweets taste best when we have drunk down gall.

          _Enter_ TILTYARD, MISTRESS TILTYARD, GOSHAWK, _and_
                           MISTRESS OPENWORK.

        God’s-so, our friends! come, come, smooth your cheek:
        After a storm the face of heaven looks sleek.
          TILT. Did I not tell you these turtles were together?
          MIS. T. How dost thou, sirrah?[1047] why, sister
             Gallipot——
          MIS. O. Lord, how she’s chang’d!
          GOS. Is your wife ill, sir?
          GAL. Yes, indeed, la, sir, very ill, very ill, never
        worse.
          MIS. T. How her head burns! feel how her pulses work!
          MIS. O. Sister, lie down a little; that always does me
        good.
          MIS. T. In good sadness,[1048] I find best ease in that
        too. Has she laid some hot thing to her stomach?
          MIS. G. No, but I will lay something anon.
          TILT. Come, come, fools, you trouble her.—Shall’s go,
        master Goshawk?
          GOS. Yes, sweet master Tiltyard.—Sirrah Rosamond, I hold
        my life Gallipot hath vext his wife.
          MIS. O. She has a horrible high colour indeed.
          GOS. We shall have your face painted with the same red
        soon at night, when your husband comes from his rubbers
        in a false alley: thou wilt not believe me that his
        bowls run with a wrong bias.
          MIS. O. It cannot sink into me that he feeds upon stale
        mutton abroad, having better and fresher at home.
          GOS. What if I bring thee where thou shalt see him stand
        at rack and manger?
          MIS. O. I’ll saddle him in’s kind, and spur him till he
        kick again.
          GOS. Shall thou and I ride our journey then?
          MIS. O. Here’s my hand.
          GOS. No more.—Come, master Tiltyard, shall we leap into
        the stirrups with our women, and amble home?
          TILT. Yes, yes.—Come, wife.
          MIS. T. In troth, sister, I hope you will do well for
        all this.
          MIS. G. I hope I shall. Farewell, good sister. Sweet
        master Goshawk.
          GAL. Welcome, brother, most kindly welcome, sir.
          ALL. Thanks, sir, for our good cheer.
                [_Exeunt all but_ GALLIPOT _and_ MIS. GALLIPOT.
          GAL. It shall be so: because a crafty knave
        Shall not outreach me, nor walk by my door
        With my wife arm in arm, as ’twere his whore,
        I’ll give him a golden coxcomb, thirty pound.
        Tush, Pru, what’s thirty pound? sweet duck, look
           cheerly.
          MIS. G. Thou’rt worthy of my heart, thou buy’st it
             dearly.

                       _Enter_ LAXTON _muffled_.

          LAX. Uds light, the tide’s against me; a pox of your
        ’pothecaryship! O for some glister to set him going!
        ’Tis one of Hercules’ labours to tread one of these city
        hens, because their cocks are still crowing over them.
        There’s no turning tail here, I must on.      [_Aside._
          MIS. G. O husband, see he comes!
          GAL. Let me deal with him.
          LAX. Bless you, sir.
          GAL. Be you blest too, sir, if you come in peace.
          LAX. Have you any good pudding tobacco, sir?
          MIS. G. O, pick no quarrels, gentle sir! my husband
        Is not a man of weapon, as you are;
        He knows all, I have open’d all before him,
        Concerning you.
          LAX. Zounds, has she shewn my letters?      [_Aside._
          MIS. G. Suppose my case were yours, what would you do?
        At such a pinch, such batteries, such assaults
        Of father, mother, kindred, to dissolve
        The knot you tied, and to be bound to him;
        How could you shift this storm off?
          LAX. If I know, hang me!
          MIS. G. Besides a story of your death was read
        Each minute to me.
          LAX. What a pox means this riddling?        [_Aside._
          GAL. Be wise, sir; let not you and I be tost
        On lawyers’ pens; they have sharp nibs, and draw
        Men’s very heart-blood from them. What need you, sir,
        To beat the drum of my wife’s infamy,
        And call your friends together, sir, to prove
        Your precontract, when sh’as confest it?
          LAX. Umh, sir,
        Has she confest it?
          GAL. Sh’as, ’faith, to me, sir,
        Upon your letter sending.
          MIS. G. I have, I have.
          LAX. If I let this iron cool, call me slave.
                                                      [_Aside._
        Do you hear, you dame Prudence? think’st thou, vile
           woman,
        I’ll take these blows and wink?
          MIS. GAL. Upon my knees.                  [_Kneeling._
          LAX. Out, impudence!
          GAL. Good sir——
          LAX. You goatish slaves!
        No wild fowl to cut up but mine?
          GAL. Alas, sir,
        You make her flesh to tremble; fright her not:
        She shall do reason, and what’s fit.
          LAX. I’ll have thee,
        Wert thou more common than an hospital,
        And more diseas’d.
          GAL. But one word, good sir!
          LAX. So, sir.
          GAL. I married her, have lien with her, and got
        Two children on her body; think but on that:
        Have you so beggarly an appetite,
        When I upon a dainty dish have fed
        To dine upon my scraps, my leavings? ha, sir?
        Do I come near you now, sir?
          LAX. Byrlady,[1049] you touch me!
          GAL. Would not you scorn to wear my clothes, sir?
          LAX. Right, sir.
          GAL. Then, pray, sir, wear not her; for she’s a
             garment
        So fitting for my body, I am loath
        Another should put it on: you’ll undo both.
        Your letter, as she said, complain’d you had spent,
        In quest of her, some thirty pound; I’ll pay it:
        Shall that, sir, stop this gap up ’twixt you two?
          LAX. Well, if I swallow this wrong, let her thank you:
        The money being paid, sir, I am gone:
        Farewell. O women, happy’s he trusts none!
          MIS. G. Despatch him hence, sweet husband.
          GAL. Yes, dear wife:
        Pray, sir, come in: ere master Laxton part,
        Thou shalt in wine drink to him.
          MIS. G. With all my heart.—         [_Exit_ GALLIPOT.
        How dost thou like my wit?
          LAX. Rarely: that wile,
        By which the serpent did the first woman beguile,
        Did ever since all women’s bosoms fill;
        You’re apple-eaters all, deceivers still.    [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                               _Holborn._

        _Enter_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE, SIR DAVY DAPPER, _and_ SIR
            ADAM APPLETON _on one side, and_ TRAPDOOR _on the
            other_.

          S. ALEX. Out with your tale, sir Davy, to sir Adam:
        A knave is in mine eye deep in my debt.
          S. DAVY. Nay, if he be a knave, sir, hold him fast.
             [SIR D. DAPPER _and_ SIR A. APPLETON _talk apart_.
          S. ALEX. Speak softly; what egg is there hatching now?
          TRAP. A duck’s egg, sir, a duck that has eaten a frog; I
        have cracked the shell, and some villany or other will
        peep out presently: the duck that sits is the bouncing
        ramp,[1050] that roaring girl my mistress; the drake
        that must tread is your son Sebastian.
          S. ALEX. Be quick.
          TRAP. As the tongue of an oyster-wench.
          S. ALEX. And see thy news be true.
          TRAP. As a barber’s every Saturday night. Mad Moll——
          S. ALEX. Ah——
          TRAP. Must be let in, without knocking, at your back
        gate.
          S. ALEX. So.
          TRAP. Your chamber will be made bawdy.
          S. ALEX. Good.
          TRAP. She comes in a shirt of mail.
          S. ALEX. How? shirt of mail?
          TRAP. Yes, sir, or a male shirt; that’s to say, in man’s
        apparel.
          S. ALEX. To my son?
          TRAP. Close to your son: your son and her moon will be
        in conjunction, if all almanacs lie not; her black
        saveguard[1051] is turned into a deep slop, the holes of
        her upper body to button-holes, her waistcoat to a
        doublet, her placket[1052] to the ancient seat of a
        cod-piece, and you shall take ’em both with standing
        collars.
          S. ALEX. Art sure of this?
          TRAP. As every throng is sure of a pick-pocket; as sure
        as a whore is of the clients all Michaelmas term, and of
        the pox after the term.
          S. ALEX. The time of their tilting?
          TRAP. Three.
          S. ALEX. The day?
          TRAP. This.
          S. ALEX. Away; ply it, watch her.
          TRAP. As the devil doth for the death of a bawd; I’ll
        watch her, do you catch her.
          S. ALEX. She’s fast: here weave thou the nets. Hark.
          TRAP. They are made.
          S. ALEX. I told them thou didst owe me money: hold it
        up; maintain’t.
          TRAP. Stiffly, as a puritan does contention.—Pox, I owe
        thee not the value of a halfpenny halter.

          S. ALEX. Thou shalt be hang’d in it ere thou ’scape
             so:
        Varlet, I’ll make thee look th[o]rough a grate!

          TRAP. I’ll do’t presently, through a tavern grate:
        drawer! pish.                                  [_Exit._

          S. ADAM. Has the knave vex’d you, sir?
          S. ALEX. Ask’d him my money,
        He swears my son receiv’d it. O, that boy
        Will ne’er leave heaping sorrow’s on my heart,
        Till he has broke it quite!
          S. ADAM. Is he still wild?
          S. ALEX. As is a Russian bear.
          S. ADAM. But he has left
        His old haunt with that baggage?
          S. ALEX. Worse still and worse;
        He lays on me his shame, I on him my curse.
          S. DAVY. My son, Jack Dapper, then shall run with him
        All in one pasture.
          S. ADAM. Proves your son bad too, sir?
          S. DAVY. As villany can make him: your Sebastian
        Doats but on one drab, mine on a thousand;
        A noise of fiddlers,[1053] tobacco, wine, and a whore,
        A mercer that will let him take up more,
        Dice, and a water-spaniel with a duck,—O
        Bring him a-bed with these: when his purse gingles,
        Roaring boys[1054] follow at’s tail, fencers and
           ningles,[1055]
        Beasts Adam ne’er gave name to; these horse-leeches suck
        My son; he being drawn dry, they all live on smoke.
          S. ALEX. Tobacco?
          S. DAVY. Right: but I have in my brain
        A windmill going that shall grind to dust
        The follies of my son, and make him wise,
        Or a stark fool. Pray lend me your advice.
          S. ALEX. } That shall you, good sir Davy.
          S. ADAM. }
          S. DAVY. Here’s the springe
        I ha’ set to catch this woodcock in: an action
        In a false name, unknown to him, is enter’d
        I’ th’ Counter to arrest Jack Dapper.
          S. ALEX. } Ha, ha, he!
          S. ADAM. }
          S. DAVY. Think you the Counter cannot break him?
          S. ADAM. Break him?
        Yes, and break’s heart too, if he lie there long.
          S. DAVY. I’ll make him sing a counter-tenor sure.
          S. ADAM. No way to tame him like it; there he shall
             learn
        What money is indeed, and how to spend it.
          S. DAVY. He’s bridled there.
          S. ALEX. Ay, yet knows not how to mend it.
        Bedlam cures not more madmen in a year
        Than one of the Counters[1056] does; men pay more dear
        There for their wit than any where: a Counter!
        Why, ’tis an university, who not sees?
        As scholars there, so here men take degrees,
        And follow the same studies all alike.
        Scholars learn first logic and rhetoric;
        So does a prisoner: with fine honey’d speech
        At’s first coming in he doth persuade, beseech
        He may be lodg’d with one that is not itchy,
        To lie in a clean chamber, in sheets not lousy;
        But when he has no money, then does he try,
        By subtle logic and quaint sophistry,
        To make the keepers trust him.
          S. ADAM. Say they do.
          S. ALEX. Then he’s a graduate.
          S. DAVY. Say they trust him not.
          S. ALEX. Then is he held a freshman and a sot,
        And never shall commence;[1057] but being still barr’d,
        Be expuls’d from the Master’s side[1058] to th’
           Two-penny ward,
        Or else i’ th’ Hole beg plac’d.[1059]
          S. ADAM. When then, I pray,
        Proceeds a prisoner?
          S. ALEX. When, money being the theme,
        He can dispute with his hard creditors’ hearts,
        And get out clear, he’s then a master of arts.
        Sir Davy, send your son to Wood Street college,
        A gentleman can no where get more knowledge.
          S. DAVY. There gallants study hard.
          S. ALEX. True, to get money.
          S. DAVY. Lies[1060] by th’ heels, i’faith: thanks,
             thanks; I ha’ sent
        For a couple of bears shall paw him.
          S. ADAM. Who comes yonder?
          S. DAVY. They look like puttocks;[1061] these should
             be they.

                     _Enter_ CURTLEAX _and_ HANGER.

          S. ALEX. I know ’em,
        They are officers; sir, we’ll leave you.
          S. DAVY. My good knights,
        Leave me; you see I’m haunted now with sprites.[1062]
          S. ALEX. ] Fare you well, sir.               [Exeunt.
          S. ADAM. ]
          CUR. This old muzzle-chops should be he by the fellow’s
        description.—Save you, sir.
          S. DAVY. Come hither, you mad varlets; did not my man
        tell you I watched here for you?
          CUR. One in a blue coat,[1063] sir, told us, that in
        this place an old gentleman would watch for us; a thing
        contrary to our oath, for we are to watch for every
        wicked member in a city.
          S. DAVY. You’ll watch then for ten thousand: what’s thy
        name, honesty?
          CUR. Sergeant Curtleax I, sir.
          S. DAVY. An excellent name for a sergeant, Curtleax:
        Sergeants indeed are weapons of the law;
        When prodigal ruffians far in debt are grown,
        Should not you cut them, citizens were o’erthrown.
        Thou dwell’st hereby in Holborn, Curtleax?
          CUR. That’s my circuit, sir; I conjure most in that
        circle.
          S. DAVY. And what young toward whelp is this?
          HAN. Of the same litter; his yeoman, sir; my name’s
        Hanger.

          S. DAVY. Yeoman Hanger:
        One pair of shears sure cut out both your coats;
        You have two names most dangerous to men’s throats;
        You two are villanous loads on gentlemen’s backs;
        Dear ware this Hanger and this Curtleax!
          CUR. We are as other men are, sir; I cannot see but he
        who makes a shew of honesty and religion, if his claws
        can fasten to his liking, he draws blood: all that live
        in the world are but great fish and little fish, and
        feed upon one another; some eat up whole men, a sergeant
        cares but for the shoulder of a man. They call us knaves
        and curs; but many times he that sets us on worries more
        lambs one year than we do in seven.
          S. DAVY. Spoke like a noble Cerberus! is the action
        entered?
          HAN. His name is entered in the book of unbelievers.
          S. DAVY. What book’s that?
          CUR. The book where all prisoners’ names stand; and not
        one amongst forty, when he comes in, believes to come
        out in haste.
          S. DAVY. Be as dogged to him as your office allows you
        to be.
          BOTH. O sir!
          S. DAVY. You know the unthrift, Jack Dapper?
          CUR. Ay, ay, sir, that gull, as well as I know my
        yeoman.
          S. DAVY. And you know his father too, sir Davy Dapper?
          CUR. As damned a usurer as ever was among Jews: if he
        were sure his father’s skin would yield him any money,
        he would, when he dies, flay it off, and sell it to
        cover drums for children at Bartholomew fair.
          S. DAVY. What toads are these to spit poison on a man to
        his face! [_Aside._]—Do you see, my honest rascals?
        yonder Greyhound is the dog he hunts with; out of that
        tavern Jack Dapper will sally: sa, sa; give the counter;
        on, set upon him!
          BOTH. We’ll charge him upo’ th’ back, sir.
          S. DAVY. Take no bail; put mace[1064] enough into his
        caudle; double your files, traverse your ground.
          BOTH. Brave, sir.
          S. DAVY. Cry arm, arm, arm!
          BOTH. Thus, sir.
          S. DAVY. There, boy, there, boy! away: look to your
        prey, my true English wolves; and so I vanish.
        [_Exit._
          CUR. Some warden of the sergeants begat this old fellow,
        upon my life: stand close.
          HAN. Shall the ambuscado lie in one place?
          CUR. No; nook thou yonder.            [_They retire._

                      _Enter_ MOLL _and_ TRAPDOOR.

          MOLL. Ralph.
          TRAP. What says my brave captain male and female?
          MOLL. This Holborn is such a wrangling street!
          TRAP. That’s because lawyers walk[1065] to and fro in’t.
          MOLL. Here’s such jostling, as if every one we met were
        drunk and reeled.
          TRAP. Stand, mistress! do you not smell carrion?
          MOLL. Carrion? no; yet I spy ravens.
          TRAP. Some poor, wind-shaken gallant will anon fall into
        sore labour, and these men-midwives[1066] must bring him
        to bed i’ the counter: there all those that are great
        with child with debts lie in.
          MOLL. Stand up.
          TRAP. Like your new Maypole.
          HAN. Whist, whew!
          CUR. Hump, no.
          MOLL. Peeping? it shall go hard, huntsmen, but I’ll
        spoil your game. They look for all the world like two
        infected malt-men coming muffled up in their cloaks in a
        frosty morning to London.
          TRAP. A course, captain; a bear comes to the stake.

                    _Enter_ JACK DAPPER _and_ GULL.

          MOLL. It should be so, for the dogs struggle to be let
        loose.
          HAN. Whew!
          CUR. Hemp.
          MOLL. Hark, Trapdoor, follow your leader.
          J. DAP. Gull.
          GULL. Master?
          J. DAP. Didst ever see such an ass as I am, boy?
          GULL. No, by my troth, sir; to lose all your money, yet
        have false dice of your own; why, ’tis as I saw a great
        fellow used t’other day; he had a fair sword and
        buckler, and yet a butcher dry beat him with a cudgel.
          TRAP.[1067] Honest servant, fly!
          MOLL. Fly, master Dapper! you’ll be arrested else.
          J. DAP. Run, Gull, and draw.
          GULL. Run, master; Gull follows you.
                                   [_Exeunt_ DAPPER _and_ GULL.
          CUR. [MOLL _holding him_] I know you well enough; you’re
        but a whore to hang upon any man!
          MOLL. Whores, then, are like sergeants; so now hang
        you.—Draw, rogue, but strike not: for a broken pate
        they’ll keep their beds, and recover twenty marks[1068]
        damages.
          CUR. You shall pay for this rescue.—Run down Shoe Lane
        and meet him.
          TRAP. Shu! is this a rescue, gentlemen, or no?
          MOLL. Rescue? a pox on ’em! Trapdoor, let’s away;
                             [_Exeunt_ CURTLEAX _and_ HANGER.’s
        I’m glad I’ve done perfect one good work to-day.
        If any gentleman be in scrivener’s bands,
        Send but for Moll, she’ll bail him by these hands.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


               _A Room in_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE’S _House_.

                      _Enter_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE.

          S. ALEX. Unhappy in the follies of a son,
        Led against judgment, sense, obedience,
        And all the powers of nobleness and wit!

                           _Enter_ TRAPDOOR.

        O wretched father!—Now, Trapdoor, will she come?
          TRAP. In man’s apparel, sir; I’m in her heart now,
        And share in all her secrets.
          S. ALEX. Peace, peace, peace!
        Here, take my German watch,[1069] hang’t up in sight,
        That I may see her hang in English for’t.
          TRAP. I warrant you for that now, next sessions rids
        her, sir. This watch will bring her in better than a
        hundred constables.              [_Hangs up the watch._
          S. ALEX. Good Trapdoor, sayst thou so? thou cheer’st my
           heart
        After a storm of sorrow. My gold chain too;
        Here, take a hundred marks[1070] in yellow links.
          TRAP. That will do well to bring the watch to light,
             sir;
        And worth a thousand of your headborough’s lanterns.
          S. ALEX. Place that a’ the court-cupboard;[1071] let
             it lie
        Full in the view of her thief-whorish eye.
          TRAP. She cannot miss it, sir; I see’t so plain,
        That I could steal’t myself.
                                           [_Places the chain._
          S. ALEX. Perhaps thou shalt too,
        That or something as weighty: what she leaves
        Thou shalt come closely in and filch away,
        And all the weight upon her back I’ll lay.
          TRAP. You cannot assure that, sir.
          S. ALEX. No? what lets[1072] it?
          TRAP. Being a stout girl, perhaps she’ll desire
             pressing;
        Then all the weight must lie upon her belly.
          S. ALEX. Belly or back I care not, so I’ve one.
          TRAP. You’re of my mind for that, sir.
          S. ALEX. Hang up my ruff-band with the diamond at it;
        It may be she’ll like that best.
          TRAP. It’s well for her, that she must have her choice;
        he thinks nothing too good for her. [_Aside._]—If you
        hold on this mind a little longer, it shall be the first
        work I do to turn thief myself; [’t]would do a man good
        to be hanged when he is so well provided for.
                                     [_Hangs up the ruff-band._
          S. ALEX. So, well said; all hangs well: would she hung
           so too!
        The sight would please me more than all their
           glisterings.
        O that my mysteries[1073] to such straits should run,
        That I must rob myself to bless my son!      [_Exeunt._

         _Enter_ SEBASTIAN WENGRAVE, MARY FITZALLARD _disguised
               as a Page, and_ MOLL _in her male dress_.

          SEB. Thou’st done me a kind office, without touch
        Either of sin or shame; our loves are honest.
          MOLL. I’d scorn to make such shift to bring you together
        else.
          SEB. Now have I time and opportunity
        Without all fear to bid thee welcome, love!
                                                [_Kisses Mary._
          MARY. Never with more desire and harder venture!
          MOLL. How strange this shews, one man to kiss another!
          SEB. I’d kiss such men to choose, Moll;
        Methinks a woman’s lip tastes well in a doublet.
          MOLL. Many an old madam has the better fortune then,
        Whose breaths grew stale before the fashion came:
        If that will help ’em, as you think ’twill do,
        They’ll learn in time to pluck on the hose[1074] too.
          SEB. The older they wax, Moll, troth I speak
             seriously,
        As some have a conceit their drink tastes better
        In an outlandish cup than in our own,
        So methinks every kiss she gives me now
        In this strange form is worth a pair of two.
        Here we are safe, and furthest from the eye
        Of all suspicion; this is my father’s chamber,
        Upon which floor he never steps till night:
        Here he mistrusts me not, nor I his coming;
        At mine own chamber he still pries unto me,
        My freedom is not there at mine own finding,
        Still check’d and curb’d; here he shall miss his
           purpose.
          MOLL. And what’s your business, now you have your
             mind, sir?
        At your great suit I promis’d you to come:
        I pitied her for name’s sake, that a Moll
        Should be so crost in love, when there’s so many
        That owe[1075] nine lays[1076] a-piece, and not so
           little.
        My tailor fitted her; how like you his work?
          SEB. So well, no art can mend it, for this purpose:
        But to thy wit and help we’re chief in debt,
        And must live still beholding.[1077]
          MOLL. Any honest pity
        I’m willing to bestow upon poor ring-doves.
          SEB. I’ll offer no worse play.
          MOLL. Nay, and[1078] you should, sir,
        I should draw first, and prove the quicker man.
          SEB. Hold, there shall need no weapon at this meeting;
        But ’cause thou shalt not loose thy fury idle,
        Here take this viol, run upon the guts,
        And end thy quarrel singing.
                          [_Takes down, and gives her, a viol._
          MOLL. Like a swan above bridge;[1079]
        For look you here’s the bridge, and here am I.
          SEB. Hold on, sweet Moll!
          MARY. I’ve heard her much commended, sir, for one
        That was ne’er taught.
          MOLL. I’m much beholding to ’em.
        Well, since you’ll needs put us together, sir,
        I’ll play my part as well as I can: it shall ne’er
        Be said I came into a gentleman’s chamber,
        And let his instrument hang by the walls.
          SEB. Why, well said, Moll, i’faith; it had been a shame
        for that gentleman then that would have let it hung
        still, and ne’er offered thee it.
          MOLL. There it should have been still then for Moll;
        For though the world judge impudently of me,
        I never came into that chamber yet
        Where I took down the instrument myself.
          SEB. Pish, let ’em prate abroad; thou’rt here where thou
        art known and loved; there be a thousand close dames
        that will call the viol[1080] an unmannerly instrument
        for a woman, and therefore talk broadly of thee, when
        you shall have them sit wider to a worse quality.
          MOLL. Push,[1081]
        I ever fall asleep and think not of ’em, sir;
        And thus I dream.
          SEB. Prithee, let’s hear thy dream, Moll.
          MOLL [_sings_].

                     _I dream there is a mistress,
                       And she lays out the money_;
                     _She goes unto her sisters,
                       She never comes at any._

                   _Re-enter_ SIR ALEXANDER _behind_.

          _She says she went to th’ Burse[1082] for patterns;
          You shall find her at Saint Kathern’s,
            And comes home with never a penny._
          SEB. That’s a free mistress, faith!
          S. ALEX. Ay, ay, ay,
        Like her that sings it; one of thine own choosing.
                                                      [_Aside._
          MOLL. But shall I dream again?

             [_Sings._] _Here comes a wench will brave ye;
               Her courage was so great,
             She lay with one o’ the navy,
               Her husband lying i’ the Fleet.
             Yet oft with him she cavell’d;[1083]
               I wonder what she ails:
             Her husband’s ship lay gravell’d,
               When her’s could hoise up sails:
             Yet she began, like all my foes,
               To call whore first; for so do those—
             A pox of all false tails!_
          SEB. Marry, amen, say I!
          S. ALEX. So say I too.                      [_Aside._
          MOLL. Hang up the viol now, sir: all this while
        I was in a dream; one shall lie rudely then;
        But being awake, I keep my legs together.
        A watch? what’s a’ clock here?
          S. ALEX. Now, now she’s trapt!               [_Aside._
          MOLL. Between[1084] one and two; nay, then I care not. A
        watch and a musician are cousin-germans in one thing,
        they must both keep time well, or there’s no goodness in
        ’em; the one else deserves to be dashed against a wall,
        and t’other to have his brains knocked out with a
        fiddle-case.
        What! a loose chain and a dangling diamond?
        Here were a brave booty for an evening thief now:
        There’s many a younger brother would be glad
        To look twice in at a window for’t,
        And wriggle in and out, like an eel in a sand-bag.
        O, if men’s secret youthful faults should judge ’em,
        ’Twould be the general’st execution
        That e’er was seen in England!
        There would be but few left to sing the ballads,
        There would be so much work: most of our brokers
        Would be chosen for hangmen; a good day for them;
        They might renew their wardrobes of free cost then.
          SEB. This is the roaring wench must do us good.
          MARY. No poison, sir, but serves us for some use;
        Which is confirm’d in her.
          SEB. Peace, peace—
        ’Foot, I did hear him sure, where’er he be.
          MOLL. Who did you hear?
          SEB. My father;
        ’Twas like a sigh[1085] of his: I must be wary.
          S. ALEX. No? wilt not be? am I alone so wretched
        That nothing takes? I’ll put him to his plunge[1086]
           for’t.
                                                      [_Aside._
          SEB. Life! here he comes.—Sir, I beseech you take it;
        Your way of teaching does so much content me,
        I’ll make it four pound; here’s forty shillings, sir—
        I think I name it right—help me, good Moll—
        Forty in hand.                       [_Offering money._
          MOLL. Sir, you shall pardon me:
        I’ve more of the meanest scholar I can teach;
        This pays me more than you have offer’d yet.
          SEB. At the next quarter,
        When I receive the means my father ’lows me,
        You shall have t’other forty.
          S. ALEX. This were well now,
        Were’t to a man whose sorrows had blind eyes;
        But mine behold his follies and untruths
        With two clear glasses. [_Aside—then coming forward._]
        How now?
          SEB. Sir?
          S. ALEX. What’s he there?
          SEB. You’re come in good time, sir; I’ve a suit to
             you;
        I’d crave your present kindness.
          S. ALEX. What’s he there?
          SEB. A gentleman, a musician, sir; one of excellent
        fingering.
          S. ALEX. Ay, I think so;—I wonder how they ’scap’d her.
              [_Aside._
          SEB. Has the most delicate stroke, sir.
          S. ALEX. A stroke indeed!—I feel it at my heart.
                                                      [_Aside._
          SEB. Puts down all your famous musicians.
          S. ALEX. Ay,—a whore may put down a hundred of ’em.
                                                      [_Aside._
          SEB. Forty shillings is the agreement, sir, between
             us:
        Now, sir, my present means mounts but to half on’t.
          S. ALEX. And he stands upon the whole?
          SEB. Ay, indeed does he, sir.
          S. ALEX. And will do still; he’ll ne’er be in other
             tale.
          SEB. Therefore I’d stop his mouth, sir, and[1087] I
             could.
          S. ALEX. Hum, true; there is no other way indeed;—
        His folly hardens, shame must needs succeed.—
                                                      [_Aside._
          Now, sir, I understand you profess music.
          MOLL. I’m a poor servant to that liberal science, sir.
          S. ALEX. Where is’t you teach?
          MOLL. Right against Clifford’s Inn.
          S. ALEX. Hum, that’s a fit place for’t: you’ve many
             scholars?
          MOLL. And some of worth, whom I may call my masters.
          S. ALEX. Ay, true, a company of whoremasters.
                                                      [_Aside._
          You teach to sing too?
          MOLL. Marry, do I, sir.
          S. ALEX. I think you’ll find an apt scholar of my son,
        Especially for prick-song.
          MOLL. I’ve much hope of him.
          S. ALEX. I’m sorry for’t, I have the less for that.
                                                      [_Aside._
          You can play any lesson?
          MOLL. At first sight, sir.
          S. ALEX. There’s a thing call’d the Witch; can you
             play that?
          MOLL. I would be sorry any one should mend me in’t.
          S. ALEX. Ay, I believe thee; thou’st so bewitch’d my
             son,
        No care will mend the work that thou hast done.
        I have bethought myself, since my art fails,
        I’ll make her policy the art to trap her.
        Here are four angels[1088] mark’d with holes in them
        Fit for his crack’d companions: gold he’ll give her;
        These will I make induction to her ruin,
        And rid shame from my house, grief from my heart.
                                                      [_Aside._
          Here, son, in what you take content and pleasure,
        Want shall not curb you; pay the gentleman
        His latter half in gold.                [_Gives money._
          SEB. I thank you, sir.
          S. ALEX. O may the operation on’t end three;
        In her, life, shame in him, and grief in me!
                                            [_Aside, and exit._
          SEB. Faith, thou shalt have ’em; ’tis my father’s
             gift:
        Never was man beguil’d with better shift.
          MOLL. He that can take me for a male musician,
        I can’t choose but make him my instrument,
        And play upon him.                           [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                      _Before_ GALLIPOT’S _Shop_.

           _Enter_ MISTRESS GALLIPOT _and_ MISTRESS OPENWORK.

          MIS. G. Is, then, that bird of yours, master Goshawk,
        so wild?
          MIS. O. A Goshawk? a puttock;[1089] all for prey: he
        angles for fish, but he loves flesh better.
          MIS. G. Is’t possible his smooth face should have
        wrinkles in’t, and we not see them?
          MIS. O. Possible? why, have not many handsome legs in
        silk stockings villanous splay feet, for all their great
        roses?[1090]
          MIS. G. Troth, sirrah,[1091] thou sayst true.
          MIS. O. Didst never see an archer, as thou’st walked by
        Bunhill, look a-squint when he drew his bow?
          MIS. G. Yes, when his arrows have fline[1092] toward
        Islington, his eyes have shot clean contrary towards
        Pimlico.
          MIS. O. For all the world so does master Goshawk double
        with me.
          MIS. G. O, fie upon him! if he double once, he’s not for
        me.
          MIS. O. Because Goshawk goes in a shag-ruff band, with a
        face sticking up in’t which shews like an agate set in a
        cramp ring,[1093] he thinks I’m in love with him.
          MIS. G. ’Las, I think he takes his mark amiss in thee!
          MIS. O. He has, by often beating into me, made me
        believe that my husband kept a whore.
          MIS. G. Very good.
          MIS. O. Swore to me that my husband this very morning
        went in a boat, with a tilt over it, to the Three
        Pigeons[1094] at Brainford, and his punk with him under
        his tilt.
          MIS. G. That were wholesome.
          MIS. O. I believed it; fell a-swearing at him, cursing
        of harlots; made me ready to hoise up sail and be there
        as soon as he.
          MIS. G. So, so.
          MIS. O. And for that voyage Goshawk comes hither
        incontinently:[1095] but, sirrah, this water-spaniel
        dives after no duck but me; his hope is having me at
        Brainford, to make me cry quack.
          MIS. G. Art sure of it?
          MIS. O. Sure of it? my poor innocent Openwork came in as
        I was poking my ruff:[1096] presently hit I him i’ the
        teeth with the Three Pigeons; he forswore all, I up and
        opened all; and now stands he in a shop hard by, like a
        musket on a rest,[1097] to hit Goshawk i’ the eye, when
        he comes to fetch me to the boat.
          MIS. G. Such another lame gelding offered to carry me
        through thick and thin,—Laxton, sirrah,—but I am rid of
        him now.
          MIS. O. Happy is the woman can be rid of ’em all! ’las,
        what are your whisking gallants to our husbands, weigh
        ’em rightly, man for man?
          MIS. G. Troth, mere shallow things.
          MIS. O. Idle, simple things, running heads; and yet let
        ’em run over us never so fast, we shopkeepers, when
        all’s done, are sure to have ’em in our pursenets[1098]
        at length; and when they are in, lord, what simple
        animals they are! then they hang the head——
          MIS. G. Then they droop——
          MIS. O. Then they write letters——
          MIS. G. Then they cog[1099]——
          MIS. O. Then deal they underhand with us, and we must
        ingle[1100] with our husbands a-bed; and we must swear
        they are our cousins, and able to do us a pleasure at
        court.
          MIS. G. And yet, when we have done our best, all’s but
        put into a riven dish;[1101] we are but frumped[1102] at
        and libelled upon.
          MIS. O. O, if it were the good Lord’s will there were a
        law made, no citizen should trust any of ’em all!

                            _Enter_ GOSHAWK.

          MIS. G. Hush, sirrah! Goshawk flutters.
          GOS. How now? are you ready?
          MIS. O. Nay, are you ready? a little thing, you see,
        makes us ready.
          GOS. Us? why, must she make one i’ the voyage?
          MIS. O. O, by any means! do I know how my husband will
        handle me?
          GOS. ’Foot, how shall I find water to keep these two
        mills going? [_Aside._]—Well, since you’ll needs be
        clapped under hatches, if I sail not with you both till
        all split,[1103] hang me up at the mainyard and duck
        me.—It’s but liquoring them both soundly, and then you
        shall see their cork-heels fly up high, like two swans
        when their tails are above water, and their long necks
        under water diving to catch gudgeons. [_Aside._]—Come,
        come, oars stand ready; the tide’s with us; on with
        those false faces; blow winds, and thou shalt take thy
        husband casting out his net to catch fresh salmon at
        Brainford.[1104]
          MIS. G. I believe you’ll eat of a cod’s head of your own
        dressing before you reach half way thither.
              [_Aside_—_She and_ MISTRESS O. _mask themselves_.
          GOS. So, so, follow close; pin as you go.

        _Enter_ LAXTON _muffled_.
          LAX. Do you hear?
          MIS. G. Yes, I thank my ears.
          LAX. I must have a bout with your ’pothecaryship.
          MIS. G. At what weapon?
          LAX. I must speak with you.
          MIS. G. No.
          LAX. No? you shall.
          MIS. G. Shall? away, souced sturgeon! half fish, half
        flesh.
          LAX. Faith, gib,[1105] are you spitting? I’ll cut your
        tail, puss-cat, for this.
          MIS. G. ’Las, poor Laxton, I think thy tail’s cut
        already! your worst.
          LAX. If I do not——                           [_Exit._
          GOS. Come, ha’ you done?

                           _Enter_ OPENWORK.

        ’S foot, Rosamond, your husband!
          OPEN. How now? sweet master Goshawk! none more
             welcome;
        I’ve wanted your embracements: when friends meet,
        The music of the spheres sounds not more sweet
        Than does their conference. Who’s this? Rosamond?
        Wife? how now, sister?
          GOS. Silence, if you love me!
          OPEN. Why mask’d?
          MIS. O. Does a mask grieve you, sir?
          OPEN. It does.
          MIS. O. Then you’re best get you a mumming.[1106]
          GOS. ’Sfoot, you’ll spoil all!
          MIS. G. May not we cover our bare faces with masks,
        As well as you cover your bald heads with hats?
          OPEN. No masks; why they’re thieves to beauty, that
             rob eyes
        Of admiration in which true love lies.
        Why are masks worn? why good? or why desir’d?
        Unless by their gay covers wits are fir’d
        To read the vildest[1107] looks: many bad faces,
        Because rich gems are treasur’d up in cases,
        Pass by their privilege current; but as caves
        Damn misers’ gold, so masks are beauties’ graves.
        Men ne’er meet women with such muffled eyes,
        But they curse her that first did masks devise,
        And swear it was some beldam. Come, off with’t.
          MIS. O. I will not.
          OPEN. Good faces mask’d are jewels kept by
             sprites;[1108]
        Hide none but bad ones, for they poison men’s sights;
        Shew, then, as shopkeepers do their broider’d stuff,
        By owl-light; fine wares can’t be open enough.
        Prithee, sweet Rose, come, strike this sail.
          MIS. O. Sail?
          OPEN. Ha!
        Yes, wife, strike sail, for storms are in thine eyes.
          MIS. O. They’re here, sir, in my brows, if any rise.
          OPEN. Ha, brows?—What says she, friend? pray, tell me
             why
        Your two flags[1109] were advanc’d; the comedy,
        Come, what’s the comedy?
          MIS. G.[1110] _Westward ho._[1111]
          OPEN. How?
          MIS. O. ’Tis _Westward ho_, she says.
          GOS. Are you both mad?
          MIS. O. Is’t market-day at Brainford, and your ware
        Not sent up yet?
          OPEN. What market-day? what ware?
          MIS. O. A pie with three pigeons in’t: ’tis drawn,
        And stays your cutting up.
          GOS. As you regard my credit——
          OPEN. Art mad?
          MIS. O. Yes, lecherous goat, baboon!
          OPEN. Baboon? then toss me in a blanket.
          MIS. O. Do I it well?
          MIS. G. Rarely.
          GOS. Belike, sir, she’s not well; best leave her.
          OPEN. No;
        I’ll stand the storm now, how fierce soe’er it blow.
          MIS. O. Did I for this lose all my friends, refuse
        Rich hopes and golden fortunes, to be made
        A stale[1112] to a common whore?
          OPEN. This does amaze me.
          MIS. O. O God, O God! feed at reversion now?
        A strumpet’s leaving?
          OPEN. Rosamond!
          GOS. I sweat; would I lay in Cold Harbour![1113]
                                                      [_Aside._
          MIS. O. Thou’st struck ten thousand daggers through my
             heart!
          OPEN. Not I, by heaven, sweet wife!
          MIS. O. Go, devil, go; that which thou swear’st by
             damns thee!
          GOS. ’S heart, will you undo me?
          MIS. O. Why stay you here? the star by which you sail
        Shines yonder above Chelsea; you lose your shore;
        If this moon light you, seek out your light whore.
          OPEN. Ha!
          MIS. G. Push,[1114] your western pug![1115]
          GOS. Zounds, now hell roars!
          MIS. O. With whom you tilted in a pair of oars
        This very morning.
          OPEN. Oars?
          MIS. O. At Brainford, sir.
          OPEN. Rack not my patience.—Master Goshawk,
        Some slave has buzz’d this into her, has he not?
        I run a tilt in Brainford with a woman?
        ’Tis a lie!
        What old bawd tells thee this? ’s death, ’tis a lie!
          MIS. O. ’Tis one [who] to thy face shall justify
        All that I speak.
          OPEN. Ud’soul, do but name that rascal!
          MIS. O. No, sir, I will not.
          GOS. Keep thee there, girl, then!           [_Aside._
          OPEN.[1116] Sister, know you this varlet?
          MIS. G. Yes.
          OPEN. Swear true;
        Is there a rogue so low damn’d? a second Judas?—
        A common hangman, cutting a man’s throat,
        Does it to his face,—bite me behind my back?
        A cur dog? swear if you know this hell-hound.
          MIS. G. In truth, I do.
          OPEN. His name?
          MIS. G. Not for the world;
        To have you to stab him.
          GOS. O brave girls, worth gold![1117]          [_Aside._
          OPEN. A word, honest master Goshawk.
                                          [_Drawing his sword._
          GOS. What do you mean, sir?
          OPEN. Keep off, and if the devil can give a name
        To this new fury, holla it through my ear,
        Or wrap it up in some hid character.
        I’ll ride to Oxford, and watch out mine eyes,
        But I will hear the Brazen Head[1118] speak, or else
        Shew me but one hair of his head or beard,
        That I may sample it. If the fiend I meet
        In mine own house, I’ll kill him; [in] the street,
        Or at the church-door,—there, ’cause he seeks t’ untie
        The knot God fastens, he deserves most to die.
          MIS. O. My husband titles him!
          OPEN. Master Goshawk, pray, sir,
        Swear to me that you know him, or know him not,
        Who makes me at Brainford to take up a petticoat
        Besides my wife’s.
          GOS. By heaven, that man I know not!
          MIS. O. Come, come, you lie!
          GOS. Will you not have all out?
        By heaven, I know no man beneath the moon
        Should do you wrong, but if I had his name,
        I’d print it in text letters.
          MIS. O. Print thine own then:
        Did’st not thou swear to me he kept his whore?
          MIS. G. And that in sinful Brainford they’d commit
        That which our lips did water at, sir,—ha?
          MIS. O. Thou spider that hast woven thy cunning web
        In mine own house t’ ensnare me! hast not thou
        Suck’d nourishment even underneath this roof,
        And turn’d it all to poison, spitting it
        On thy friend’s face, my husband, (he as ’twere
           sleeping,)
        Only to leave him ugly to mine eyes,
        That they might glance on thee?
          MIS. G. Speak, are these lies?
          GOS. Mine own shame me confounds!
          OPEN.[1119] No more; he’s stung.
        Who’d think that in one body there could dwell
        Deformity and beauty, heaven and hell?
        Goodness I see is but outside; we all set
        In rings of gold stones that be counterfeit:
        I thought you none.
          GOS. Pardon me!
          OPEN. Truth I do:
        This blemish grows in nature, not in you;
        For man’s creation stick[s] even moles in scorn
        On fairest cheeks.—Wife, nothing’s perfect born.
          MIS. O. I thought you had been born perfect.
          OPEN. What’s this whole world but a gilt rotten pill?
        For at the heart lies the old core still.
        I’ll tell you, master Goshawk, ay, in your eye
        I have seen wanton fire; and then, to try
        The soundness of my judgment, I told you
        I kept a whore, made you believe ’twas true,
        Only to feel how your pulse beat; but find
        The world can hardly yield a perfect friend.
        Come, come, a trick of youth, and ’tis forgiven;
        This rub put by, our love shall run more even.
          MIS. O. You’ll deal upon men’s wives no more?
          GOS. No; you teach me
        A trick for that.
          MIS. O. Troth, do not; they’ll o’erreach thee.
          OPEN. Make my house yours, sir, still.
          GOS. No.
          OPEN. I say you shall:
        Seeing thus besieg’d it holds out, ’twill never fall.

        _Enter_ GALLIPOT, _followed by_ GREENWIT _disguised as a
          sumner;[1120] and_ LAXTON _muffled aloof off_.[1121]

          OPEN.             } How now?
          GOS., _&c._[1122] }
          GAL. With me, sir?
          GREEN. You, sir. I have gone snuffling[1123] up and down
        by your door this hour, to watch for you.
          MIS. G. What’s the matter, husband?
          GREEN. I have caught a cold in my head, sir, by sitting
        up late in the Rose tavern; but I hope you understand my
        speech.
          GAL. So, sir.
          GREEN. I cite you by the name of Hippocrates Gallipot,
        and you by the name of Prudence Gallipot, to appear upon
        _Crastino_,—do you see?—_Crastino sancti Dunstani_, this
        Easter term, in Bow Church.
          GAL. Where, sir? what says he?
          GREEN. Bow, Bow Church, to answer to a libel of
        precontract on the part and behalf of the said Prudence
        and another: you’re best, sir, take a copy of the
        citation, ’tis but twelvepence.
          OPEN.       } A citation!
          GOS., _&c._ }
          GAL. You pocky-nosed rascal, what slave fees you to
        this?
          LAX. [_coming forward_] Slave? I ha’ nothing to do with
        you; do you hear, sir?
          GOS. Laxton, is’t not? What fagary[1124] is this?
          GAL. Trust me, I thought, sir, this storm long ago
        Had been full laid, when, if you be remember’d,[1125]
        I paid you the last fifteen pound, besides
        The thirty you had first; for then you swore——
          LAX. Tush, tush, sir, oaths,—
        Truth, yet I’m loath to vex you—tell you what,
        Make up the money I had an hundred pound,
        And take your bellyful of her.
          GAL. An hundred pound?
          MIS. G. What, a hundred pound? he gets none: what, a
        hundred pound?
          GAL. Sweet Pru, be calm; the gentleman offers thus:
        If I will make the moneys that are past
        A hundred pound, he will discharge all courts,
        And give his bond never to vex us more.
          MIS. G. A hundred pound? ’Las, take, sir, but
             threescore!
        Do you seek my undoing?
          LAX. I’ll not ’bate one sixpence.—
        I’ll maul you, puss, for spitting.
          MIS. G. Do thy worst.—
        Will fourscore stop thy mouth?
          LAX. No.
          MIS. G. You’re a slave;
        Thou cheat, I’ll now tear money from thy throat.—
        Husband, lay hold on yonder tawny-coat.[1126]
          GREEN. Nay, gentlemen, seeing your women are so hot, I
        must lose my hair[1127] in their company, I see.
                                   [_Takes off his false hair._
          MIS. O. His hair sheds off, and yet he speaks not so
        much in the nose as he did before.
          GOS. He has had the better chirurgeon.—Master Greenwit,
        is your wit so raw as to play no better a part than a
        sumner’s?
          GAL. I pray, who plays _A knack to know an honest
        man_,[1128] in this company?
          MIS. G. Dear husband, pardon me, I did dissemble,
        Told thee I was his precontracted wife,
        When letters came from him for thirty pound:
        I had no shift but that.
          GAL. A very clean shift,
        But able to make me lousy: on.
          MIS. G. Husband, I pluck’d,
        When he had tempted me to think well of him,
        Gelt feathers[1129] from thy wings, to make him fly
        More lofty.
          GAL. A’ the top of you, wife: on.
          MIS. G. He having wasted them, comes now for more,
        Using me as a ruffian doth his whore,
        Whose sin keeps him in breath. By heaven, I vow,
        Thy bed he ne’er wrong’d more than he does now!
          GAL. My bed? ha, ha! like enough; a shop-board will
             serve
        To have a cuckold’s coat cut out upon:
        Of that we’ll talk hereafter.—You’re a villain.
          LAX. Hear me but speak, sir, you shall find me none.
          OPEN.       } Pray, sir, be patient, and hear him.
          GOS., _&c._ }
          GAL. I’m muzzl’d for biting, sir; use me how you will.
          LAX. The first hour that your wife was in my eye,
        Myself with other gentlemen sitting by
        In your shop tasting smoke, and speech being us’d,
        That men who’ve fairest wives are most abus’d,
        And hardly scape[1130] the horn, your wife maintain’d
        That only such spots in city dames were stain’d
        Justly but by men’s slanders: for her own part,
        She vow’d that you had so much of her heart,
        No man, by all his wit, by any wile
        Never so fine-spun, should yourself beguile
        Of what in her was yours.
          GAL. Yet, Pru, ’tis well.—
        Play out your game at Irish,[1131] sir: who wins?
          MIS. O. The trial is when she comes to bearing.[1132]
          LAX. I scorn’d one woman thus should brave all men,
        And, which more vex’d me, a she-citizen;
        Therefore I laid siege to her: out she held,
        Gave many a brave repulse, and me compell’d
        With shame to sound retreat to my hot lust:
        Then, seeing all base desires rak’d up in dust,
        And that[1133] to tempt her modest ears, I swore
        Ne’er to presume again: she said, her eye
        Would ever give me welcome honestly;
        And, since I was a gentleman, if’t run low,
        She would my state relieve, not to o’erthrow
        Your own and hers: did so; then seeing I wrought
        Upon her meekness, me she set at nought;
        And yet to try if I could turn that tide,
        You see what stream I strove with; but, sir, I swear
        By heaven, and by those hopes men lay up there,
        I neither have nor had a base intent
        To wrong your bed! what’s done, is merriment:
        Your gold I pay back with this interest,
        When I’d most power to do’t, I wrong’d you least.
          GAL. If this no gullery be, sir——
          OPEN.       } No, no, on my life!
          GOS., _&c._ }
          GAL. Then, sir, I am beholden—not to you, wife,—
        But, master Laxton, to your want of doing
        Ill, which it seems you have not.—Gentlemen,
        Tarry and dine here all.
          OPEN. Brother, we’ve a jest,
        As good as yours, to furnish out a feast.
          Gal. We’ll crown our table with’t.—Wife, brag no more
        Of holding out: who most brags is most whore.
                                                     [_Exeunt._


                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                              _A Street._

        _Enter_ JACK DAPPER, MOLL, SIR BEAUTEOUS GANYMEDE, _and_
                            SIR THOMAS LONG.

          J. DAP. But, prithee, master captain Jack, be plain and
        perspicuous with me; was it your Meg of Westminster’s
        courage[1134] that rescued me from the Poultry
        puttocks[1135] indeed?
          MOLL. The valour of my wit, I ensure you, sir, fetched
        you off bravely, when you were i’ the forlorn hope among
        those desperates. Sir Beauteous Ganymede here, and sir
        Thomas Long, heard that cuckoo, my man Trapdoor, sing
        the note of your ransom from captivity.
          S. BEAU. Uds so, Moll, where’s that Trapdoor?
          MOLL. Hanged, I think, by this time: a justice in
        this town, that speaks nothing but _make a mittimus,
        away with him to Newgate_, used that rogue like a
        firework,[1136] to run upon a line betwixt him and
        me.
          ALL. How, how?
          MOLL. Marry, to lay trains of villany to blow up my
        life: I smelt the powder, spied what linstock[1137]
        gave fire to shoot against the poor captain of the
        galley-foist,[1138] and away slid I my man like a
        shovel-board shilling.[1139] He strouts[1140] up and
        down the suburbs, I think, and eats up whores, feeds
        upon a bawd’s garbage.
          S. THO. Sirrah, Jack Dapper——
          J. DAP. What sayst, Tom Long?
          S. THO. Thou hadst a sweet-faced boy, hail-fellow with
        thee, to your little Gull: how is he spent?
          J. DAP. Troth, I whistled the poor little buzzard off a’
        my fist, because, when he waited upon me at the
        ordinaries, the gallants hit me i’ the teeth still, and
        said I looked like a painted alderman’s tomb, and the
        boy at my elbow like a death’s head.—Sirrah Jack, Moll——
          MOLL. What says my little Dapper?
          S. BEAU. Come, come; walk and talk, walk and talk.
          J. DAP. Moll and I’ll be i’ the midst.
          MOLL. These knights shall have squires’ places belike
        then: well, Dapper, what say you?
          J. DAP. Sirrah captain, mad Mary, the gull my own
        father, Dapper Sir Davy, laid these London
        boot-halers,[1141] the catchpolls, in ambush to set upon
        me.
          ALL. Your father? away, Jack!
          J. DAP. By the tassels of this handkercher, ’tis true:
        and what was his warlike stratagem, think you? he
        thought, because a wicker cage tames a nightingale, a
        lousy prison could make an ass of me.
          ALL. A nasty plot!
          J. DAP. Ay, as though a Counter, which is a park in
        which all the wild beasts of the city run head by head,
        could tame me!
          MOLL. Yonder comes my lord Noland.

                          _Enter_ LORD NOLAND.

          ALL. Save you, my lord.
          L. NOL. Well met, gentlemen all.—Good sir Beauteous
        Ganymede, sir Thomas Long,—and how does master Dapper?
          J. DAP. Thanks, my lord.
          MOLL. No tobacco, my lord?
          L. NOL. No, faith, Jack.
          J. DAP. My lord Noland, will you go to Pimlico with us?
        we are making a boon voyage to that nappy land of
        spice-cakes.
          L. NOL. Here’s such a merry ging,[1142] I could find in
        my heart to sail to the world’s end with such company:
        come, gentlemen, let’s on.
          J. DAP. Here’s most amorous weather, my lord.
          ALL. Amorous weather!                   [_They walk._
          J. DAP. Is not amorous a good word?

          _Enter_ TRAPDOOR _disguised as a poor soldier with a
           patch over one eye, and_ TEARCAT _all in tatters_.

          TRAP. Shall we set upon the infantry, these troops of
        foot? Zounds, yonder comes Moll, my whorish master and
        mistress! would I had her kidneys between my teeth!
          TEAR. I had rather have a cow-heel.
          TRAP. Zounds, I am so patched up, she cannot discover
        me: we’ll on.
          TEAR. _Alla corago_[1143] then!
          TRAP. Good your honours and worships, enlarge the ears
        of commiseration, and let the sound of a hoarse military
        organ-pipe penetrate your pitiful bowels, to extract out
        of them so many small drops of silver as may give a hard
        straw-bed lodging to a couple of maimed soldiers.
          J. DAP. Where are you maimed?
          TEAR. In both our nether limbs.
          MOLL. Come, come, Dapper, let’s give ’em something:
        ’las, poor men! what money have you? by my troth, I love
        a soldier with my soul.
          S. BEAU. Stay, stay; where have you served?
          S. THO. In any part of the Low Countries?
          TRAP. Not in the Low Countries, if it please your
        manhood, but in Hungary against the Turk at the siege of
        Belgrade.
          L. NOL. Who served there with you, sirrah?
          TRAP. Many Hungarians, Moldavians, Vallachians, and
        Transylvanians, with some Sclavonians; and retiring
        home, sir, the Venetian galleys took us prisoners, yet
        freed us, and suffered us to beg up and down the
        country.
          J. DAP. You have ambled all over Italy, then?
          TRAP. O sir, from Venice to Roma, Vecchia,
        Bononia,[1144] Romagna, Bologna, Modena, Piacenza,
        and Tuscana, with all her cities, as Pistoia,
        Volterra,[1145] Montepulciano, Arezzo; with the
        Siennois, and divers others.
          MOLL. Mere rogues! put spurs to ’em once more.
          J. DAP. Thou lookest like a strange creature, a fat
        butter-box, yet speakest English: what art thou?
          TEAR. _Ich, mine here? ich bin den ruffling Tearcat, den
        brave soldado; ich bin dorich all Dutchlant gereisen;
        der schellum das meer ine beasa ine woert gaeb, ich
        slaag um stroakes on tom cop; dastich den hundred touzun
        divel halle, frollich, mine here._
          S. BEAU. Here, here; let’s be rid of their
        jobbering.[1146]
                                        [_About to give money._
          MOLL. Not a cross,[1147] sir Beauteous.—You base rogues,
        I have taken measure of you better than a tailor can;
        and I’ll fit you, as you, monster with one eye, have
        fitted me.
          TRAP. Your worship will not abuse a soldier?
          MOLL. Soldier? thou deservest to be hanged up by that
        tongue which dishonours so noble a profession: soldier?
        you skeldering[1148] varlet! hold, stand; there should
        be a trapdoor here abouts.
                                        [_Pulls off his patch._
          TRAP. The balls of these glasiers[1149] of mine, mine
        eyes, shall be shot up and down in any hot piece of
        service for my invincible mistress.
          J. DAP. I did not think there had been such knavery in
        black patches[1150] as now I see.
          MOLL. O sir, he hath been brought up in the Isle of
        Dogs,[1151] and can both fawn like a spaniel, and bite
        like a mastiff, as he finds occasion.
          L. NOL. What are you, sirrah? a bird of this feather
        too?
          TEAR. A man beaten from the wars, sir.
          S. THO. I think so, for you never stood to fight.
          J. DAP. What’s thy name, fellow soldier?
          TEAR. I am called by those that have seen my valour,
        Tearcat.
          ALL. Tearcat?
          MOLL. A mere whip-jack,[1152] and that is, in the
        commonwealth of rogues, a slave that can talk of
        sea-fight, name all your chief pirates, discover more
        countries to you than either the Dutch, Spanish, French,
        or English ever found out; yet indeed all his service is
        by land, and that is to rob a fair, or some such
        venturous exploit. Tearcat? ’foot, sirrah, I have your
        name, now I remember me, in my book of horners; horns
        for the thumb,[1153] you know how.
          TEAR. No indeed, captain Moll, for I know you by sight,
        I am no such nipping Christian,[1154] but a maunderer
        upon the pad,[1155] I confess; and meeting with honest
        Trapdoor here, whom you had cashiered from bearing arms,
        out at elbows, under your colours, I instructed him in
        the rudiments of roguery, and by my map made him sail
        over any country you can name, so that now he can
        maunder better than myself.
          J. DAP. So, then, Trapdoor, thou art turned soldier now?
          TRAP. Alas, sir, now there’s no wars, ’tis the safest
        course of life I could take!
          MOLL. I hope, then, you can cant, for by your cudgels,
        you, sirrah, are an upright man.[1156]
          TRAP. As any walks the highway, I assure you.
          MOLL. And, Tearcat, what are you? a wild rogue,[1157] an
        angler,[1158] or a ruffler?[1159]
          TEAR. Brother to this upright man, flesh and blood;
        ruffling Tearcat is my name, and a ruffler is my style,
        my title, my profession.
          MOLL. Sirrah, where’s your doxy? halt not with me.
          ALL. Doxy, Moll? what’s that?
          MOLL. His wench.
          TRAP. My doxy? I have, by the salomon,[1160] a doxy
        that carries a kinchin mort in her slate[1161] at her
        back, besides my dell and my dainty wild dell,[1162]
        with all whom I’ll tumble this next darkmans in the
        strommel,[1163] and drink ben baufe, and eat a fat
        gruntling cheat, a cackling cheat, and a quacking
        cheat.
          J. DAP. Here’s old[1164] cheating!
          TRAP. My doxy stays for me in a bousing ken,[1165] brave
        captain.
          MOLL. He says his wench stays for him in an ale-house.—
        You are no pure rogues![1166]
          TEAR. Pure rogues? no, we scorn to be pure rogues; but
        if you come to our lib ken or our stalling ken,[1167]
        you shall find neither him nor me a queer cuffin.[1168]
          MOLL. So, sir, no churl of you.
          TEAR. No, but a ben cove, a brave cove, a gentry cuffin.
          L. NOL. Call you this canting?
          J. DAP. Zounds, I’ll give a school-master half-a-crown
        a-week, and teach me this pedlar’s French.[1169]
          TRAP. Do but stroll, sir, half a harvest with us, sir,
        and you shall gabble your bellyful.
          MOLL. Come, you rogue, cant with me.
          S. THO. Well said, Moll.—Cant with her, sirrah, and you
        shall have money, else not a penny.
          TRAP. I’ll have a bout, if she please.
          MOLL. Come on, sirrah!
          TRAP. Ben mort,[1170] shall you and I heave a bough,
        mill a ken, or nip a bung, and then we’ll couch a
        hogshead under the ruffmans, and there you shall wap
        with me, and I’ll niggle with you.
          MOLL. Out, you damned impudent rascal!
          TRAP. Cut benar[1171] whids, and hold your fambles and
        your stamps.
          L. NOL. Nay, nay, Moll, why art thou angry? what was his
        gibberish?
          MOLL. Marry, this, my lord, says he: _Ben mort_, good
        wench, _shall you and I heave a bough,[1172] mill a ken,
        or nip a bung_? shall you and I rob a house, or cut a
        purse?
          ALL. Very good.
          MOLL. _And then we’ll couch a hogshead under the
        ruffmans_; and then we’ll lie under a hedge.
          TRAP. That was my desire, captain, as ’tis fit a soldier
        should lie.
          MOLL. _And there you shall wap with me, and I’ll niggle
        with you_,—and that’s all.
          S. BEAU. Nay, nay, Moll, what’s that wap?
          J. DAP. Nay, teach me what niggling is; I’d fain be
        niggling.
          MOLL. Wapping and niggling is all one, the rogue my man
        can tell you.
          TRAP. ’Tis fadoodling, if it please you.
          S. BEAU. This is excellent! One fit more, good Moll.
          MOLL. Come, you rogue, sing with me.

                  _Song by_ MOLL _and_ TEARCAT.[1173]

               _A gage[1174] of ben rom-bouse
               In a bousing ken of Rom-vile,
               Is benar than a caster,
               Peck, pennam, lay, or popler,
               Which we mill in deuse a vile.
               O I wud lib all the lightmans,
               O I wud lib all the darkmans,
               By the salomon, under the ruffmans,
               By the salomon, in the hartmans,
               And scour the queer cramp ring,
               And couch till a palliard dock’d my dell,
               So my bousy nab might skew rom-bouse well.
               Avast to the pad, let us bing;
               Avast to the pad, let us bing._
          ALL. Fine knaves, i’faith!
          J. DAP. The grating of ten new cart-wheels, and the
        gruntling of five hundred hogs coming from Rumford
        market, cannot make a worse noise than this canting
        language does in my ears. Pray, my lord Noland, let’s
        give these soldiers their pay.
          S. BEAU. Agreed, and let them march.
          L. NOL. Here, Moll.                 [_Gives money._
          MOLL. Now I see that you are stalled to the rogue,[1175]
        and are not ashamed of your professions: look you, my
        lord Noland here and these gentlemen bestow[1176] upon
        you two two boards[1177] and a half, that’s two
        shillings sixpence.
          TRAP. Thanks to your lordship.
          TEAR. Thanks, heroical captain.
          MOLL. Away!
          TRAP. We shall cut ben whids[1178] of your masters and
        mistress-ship wheresoever we come.
          MOLL. You’ll maintain, sirrah, the old justice’s plot to
        his face?
          TRAP. Else trine me on the cheats,[1179]—hang me.
          MOLL. Be sure you meet me there.
          TRAP. Without any more maundering,[1180] I’ll do’t.—
        Follow, brave Tearcat.
          TEAR. _I præ, sequor_; let us go, mouse.[1181]
                              [_Exeunt_ TRAPDOOR _and_ TEARCAT.
          L. NOL. Moll, what was in that canting song?
          MOLL. Troth, my lord, only a praise of good drink, the
        only milk which these wild beasts love to suck, and thus
        it was:

                      _A rich cup of wine,
                      O it is juice divine!
                      More wholesome for the head
                      Than meat, drink, or bread:
                      To fill my drunken pate
                      With that, I’d sit up late;
                      By the heels would I lie,
                      Under a lowsy hedge die,
                      Let a slave have a pull
                      At my whore, so I be full
                      Of that precious liquor_:

        and a parcel of such stuff, my lord, not worth the
        opening.

        _Enter a Cutpurse very gallant,[1182] with four or five
                      others, one having a wand._

          L. NOL. What gallant comes yonder?
          S. THO. Mass, I think I know him; ’tis one of
        Cumberland.
          FIRST CUT. Shall we venture to shuffle in amongst yon
        heap of gallants, and strike?[1183]
          SEC. CUT. ’Tis a question whether there be any silver
        shells[1184] amongst them, for all their satin outsides.
          THE REST. Let’s try.
          MOLL. Pox on him, a gallant? Shadow me, I know him; ’tis
        one that cumbers the land indeed: if he swim near to the
        shore of any of your pockets, look to your purses.
          L. NOL.             } Is’t possible?
          S. BEAU., _&c._[1185] }
          MOLL. This brave[1182] fellow is no better than a foist.
          L. NOL.       } Foist! what’s that?
          S. BEAU., _&c._ }
          MOLL. A diver with two fingers, a pick-pocket; all his
        train study the figging-law,[1186] that’s to say,
        cutting of purses and foisting. One of them is a nip; I
        took him once i’ the two-penny gallery[1187] at the
        Fortune: then there’s a cloyer, or snap, that dogs any
        new brother in that trade, and snaps will have half in
        any booty. He with the wand is both a stale, whose
        office is to face a man i’ the streets, whilst shells
        are drawn by another, and then with his black conjuring
        rod in his hand, he, by the nimbleness of his eye and
        juggling stick, will, in cheaping a piece of plate at a
        goldsmith’s stall, make four or five rings mount from
        the top of his _caduceus_, and, as if it were at
        leap-frog, they skip into his hand presently.
          SEC. CUT. Zounds, we are smoked!
          THE REST.[1188] Ha!
          SEC. CUT. We are boiled,[1189] pox on her! see, Moll,
        the roaring drab!
          FIRST CUT. All the diseases of sixteen hospitals boil
        her!—Away!
          MOLL. Bless you, sir.
          FIRST CUT. And you, good sir.
          MOLL. Dost not ken me, man?
          FIRST CUT. No, trust me, sir.
          MOLL. Heart, there’s a knight, to whom I’m bound for
        many favours, lost his purse at the last new play i’ the
        Swan,[1190] seven angels[1191] in’t: make it good,
        you’re best; do you see? no more.
          FIRST CUT. A synagogue[1192] shall be called, mistress
        Mary; disgrace me not; _pacus palabros_,[1193] I will
        conjure for you: farewell. _Exit with his companions._
          MOLL. Did not I tell you, my lord?
          L. NOL. I wonder how thou camest to the knowledge of
        these nasty villains.
          S. THO. And why do the foul mouths of the world call
        thee Moll Cutpurse? a name, methinks, damned and odious.
          MOLL. Dare any step forth to my face and say,
        I’ve ta’en thee doing so, Moll? I must confess,
        In younger days, when I was apt to stray,
        I’ve sat amongst such adders; seen their stings,
        As any here might, and in full play-houses
        Watch’d their quick-diving hands, to bring to shame
        Such rogues, and in that stream met an ill name.
        When next, my lord, you spy any one of those,
        So he be in his art a scholar, question him;
        Tempt him with gold to open the large book
        Of his close villanies; and you yourself shall cant
        Better than poor Moll can, and know more laws
        Of cheators, lifters, nips, foists, puggards,
           curbers,[1194]
        With all the devil’s black-guard,[1195] than it’s fit
        Should be discover’d to a noble wit.
        I know they have their orders, offices,
        Circuits, and circles, unto which they’re bound
        To raise their own damnation in.
          J. DAP. How dost thou know it?
          MOLL. As you do; I shew’t you, they to me shew it.
        Suppose, my lord, you were in Venice——
          L. NOL. Well.
          MOLL. If some Italian pander there would tell
        All the close tricks of courtesans, would not you
        Hearken to such a fellow?
          L. NOL. Yes.
          MOLL. And here,
        Being come from Venice, to a friend most dear
        That were to travel thither, you’d proclaim
        Your knowledge in those villanies, to save
        Your friend from their quick danger: must you have
        A black ill name, because ill things you know?
        Good troth, my lord, I’m made Moll Cutpurse so.
        How many are whores in small ruffs and still looks!
        How many chaste whose names fill Slander’s books!
        Were all men cuckolds whom gallants in their scorns
        Call so, we should not walk for goring horns.
        Perhaps for my mad going some reprove me;
        I please myself, and care not else who love[1196] me.
          L. NOL.         } A brave mind, Moll, i’faith!
          S. BEAU., _&c._ }
          S. THO. Come, my lord, shall’s to the ordinary?
          L. NOL. Ay, ’tis noon sure.
          MOLL. Good my lord, let not my name condemn me to you,
        or to the world: a fencer I hope may be called a coward;
        is he so for that? If all that have ill names in London
        were to be whipt, and to pay but twelve-pence a-piece to
        the beadle, I would rather have his office than a
        constable’s.
          J. DAP. So would I, captain Moll: ’twere a sweet
        tickling office, i’faith.                    [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


          _A Garden attached to_ SIR ALEX. WENGRAVE’S _house_.

        _Enter_ SIR ALEXANDER WENGRAVE, GOSHAWK, GREENWIT, _and
                                others_.

          S. ALEX. My son marry a thief, that impudent girl,
        Whom all the world stick their worst eyes upon!
          GREEN. How will your care prevent it?
          GOS. ’Tis impossible:
        They marry close, they’re gone, but none knows whither.
          S. ALEX. O gentlemen, when have[1197] a father’s
             heart-strings

                            _Enter Servant._
        Held out so long from breaking?—Now what news, sir?
          SER. They were met upo’ th’ water an hour since, sir,
        Putting in towards the Sluice.
          S. ALEX. The Sluice? come, gentlemen,
        ’Tis Lambeth works against us.         [_Exit Servant._
          GREEN. And that Lambeth
        Joins more mad matches than your six wet towns[1198]
        ’Twixt that and Windsor Bridge, where fares lie soaking.
          S. ALEX. Delay no time, sweet gentlemen: to
             Blackfriars!
        We’ll take a pair of oars, and make after ’em.

                           _Enter_ TRAPDOOR.

            TRAP. Your son and that bold masculine ramp[1199] my
             mistress
        Are landed now at Tower.
          S. ALEX. Hoyda, at Tower?
          TRAP. I heard it now reported.
          S. ALEX. Which way, gentlemen,
        Shall I bestow my care? I’m drawn in pieces
        Betwixt deceit and shame.

                      _Enter_ SIR GUY FITZALLARD.

            S. GUY. Sir Alexander,
        You are well met, and most rightly servèd;
        My daughter was a scorn to you.
          S. ALEX. Say not so, sir.
          S. GUY. A very abject she, poor gentlewoman!
        Your house had been dishonour’d. Give you joy, sir,
        Of your son’s gascoyne-bride![1200] you’ll be a
           grandfather shortly
        To a fine crew of roaring sons and daughters;
        ’Twill help to stock the suburbs passing well, sir.
          S. ALEX. O, play not with the miseries of my heart!
        Wounds should be drest and heal’d, not vex’d, or left
        Wide open, to the anguish of the patient,
        And scornful air let in; rather let pity
        And advice charitably help to refresh ’em.
          S. GUY. Who’d place his charity so unworthily?
        Like one that gives alms to a cursing beggar:
        Had I but found one spark of goodness in you
        Toward my deserving child, which then grew fond
        Of your son’s virtues, I had eas’d you now;
        But I perceive both fire of youth and goodness
        Are rak’d up in the ashes of your age,
        Else no such shame should have come near your house,
        Nor such ignoble sorrow touch your heart.
          S. ALEX. If not for worth, for pity’s sake assist me!
          GREEN. You urge a thing past sense; how can he help
             you?
        All his assistance is as frail as ours:
        Full as uncertain where’s the place that holds ’em;
        One brings us water-news; then comes another
        With a full-charg’d mouth, like a culverin’s voice,
        And he reports the Tower: whose sounds are truest?
          GOS. In vain you flatter him.—Sir Alexander——
          S. GUY. I flatter him? gentlemen, you wrong me
             grossly.
          GREEN. He does it well, i’faith.
          S. GUY. Both news are false,
        Of Tower or water; they took no such way yet.
          S. ALEX. O strange! hear you this, gentlemen? yet more
             plunges.[1201]
          S. GUY. They’re nearer than you think for, yet more
             close
        Than if they were further off.
          S. ALEX. How am I lost
        In these distractions!
          S. GUY. For your speeches, gentlemen,
        In taxing me for rashness, ’fore you all
        I will engage my state to half his wealth,
        Nay, to his son’s revenues, which are less,
        And yet nothing at all till they come from him,
        That I could, if my will stuck to my power,
        Prevent this marriage yet, nay, banish her
        For ever from his thoughts, much more his arms.
          S. ALEX. Slack not this goodness, though you heap upon
             me
        Mountains of malice and revenge hereafter!
        I’d willingly resign up half my state to him,
        So he would marry the meanest drudge I hire.
          GREEN. He talks impossibilities, and you believe ’em.
          S. GUY. I talk no more than I know how to finish,
        My fortunes else are his that dares stake with me.
        The poor young gentleman I love and pity;
        And to keep shame from him (because the spring
        Of his affection was my daughter’s first,
        Till his frown blasted all), do but estate him
        In those possessions which your love and care
        Once pointed out for him, that he may have room
        To entertain fortunes of noble birth,
        Where now his desperate wants cast[1202] him upon her;
        And if I do not, for his own sake chiefly,
        Rid him of this disease that now grows on him,
        I’ll forfeit my whole state, before these gentlemen.
          GREEN. Troth, but you shall not undertake such
             matches;
        We’ll persuade so much with you.
          S. ALEX. Here’s my ring;               [_Gives ring._
        He will believe this token. ’Fore these gentlemen
        I will confirm it fully: all those lands
        My first love ’lotted him, he shall straight possess
        In that refusal.
          S. GUY. If I change it not,
        Change me into a beggar.
          GREEN. Are you mad, sir?
          S. GUY. ’Tis done.
          GOS. Will you undo yourself by doing,
        And shew a prodigal trick in your old days?
          S. ALEX. ’Tis a match, gentlemen.
          S. GUY. Ay, ay, sir, ay.
        I ask no favour, trust to you for none;
        My hope rests in the goodness of your son.     [_Exit._
          GREEN. He holds it up well yet.
          GOS. Of an old knight, i’faith.
          S. ALEX. Curst be the time I laid his first love
             barren,
        Wilfully barren, that before this hour
        Had sprung forth fruits of comfort and of honour!
        He lov’d a virtuous gentlewoman.

                   _Enter_ MOLL _in her male dress_.

          GOS. Life, here’s Moll!
          GREEN. Jack?
          GOS. How dost thou, Jack?
          MOLL. How dost thou, gallant?
          S. ALEX. Impudence, where’s my son?
          MOLL. Weakness, go look him.
          S. ALEX. Is this your wedding gown?
          MOLL. The man talks monthly:[1203]
        Hot broth and a dark chamber for the knight!
        I see he’ll be stark mad at our next meeting.  [_Exit._
          GOS. Why, sir, take comfort now, there’s no such
             matter,
        No priest will marry her, sir, for a woman
        Whiles that shape’s on; and it was never known
        Two men were married and conjoin’d in one:
        Your son hath made some shift to love another.
          S. ALEX. Whate’er she be, she has my blessing with
             her:
        May they be rich and fruitful, and receive
        Like comfort to their issue as I take
        In them! has pleas’d me now; marrying not this,
        Through a whole world he could not choose amiss.
          GREEN. Glad you’re so penitent for your former sin,
             sir.
          GOS. Say he should take a wench with her smock-dowry,
        No portion with her but her lips and arms?
          S. ALEX. Why, who thrive better, sir? they have most
             blessing,
        Though other have more wealth, and least repent:
        Many that want most know the most content.
          GREEN. Say he should marry a kind youthful sinner?
          S. ALEX. Age will quench that; any offence but theft
        And drunkenness, nothing but death can wipe away;
        Their sins are green even when their heads are grey.
        Nay, I despair not now; my heart’s cheer’d, gentlemen;
        No face can come unfortunately to me.—

                          _Re-enter Servant._

        Now, sir, your news?
          SER. Your son, with his fair bride,
        Is near at hand.
          S. ALEX. Fair may their fortunes be!
          GREEN. Now you’re resolv’d,[1204] sir, it was never
             she.
          S. ALEX. I find it in the music of my heart.

          _Enter_ SEBASTIAN WENGRAVE _leading in_ MOLL _in her
           female dress and masked, and_ SIR GUY FITZALLARD.

        See where they come.
          GOS. A proper lusty presence, sir.
          S. ALEX. Now has he pleas’d me right: I always
             counsell’d him
        To choose a goodly, personable creature:
        Just of her pitch was my first wife his mother.
          SEB. Before I dare discover my offence,
        I kneel for pardon.                          [_Kneels._
          S. ALEX. My heart gave it thee
        Before thy tongue could ask it:
        Rise; thou hast rais’d my joy to greater height
        Than to that seat where grief dejected it.
        Both welcome to my love and care for ever!
        Hide not my happiness too long; all’s pardon’d;
        Here are our friends.—Salute her, gentlemen.
                                            [_They unmask her._
          ALL. Heart, who’s this? Moll!
          S. ALEX. O my reviving shame! is’t I must live
        To be struck blind? be it the work of sorrow,
        Before age take’t in hand!
          S. GUY. Darkness and death!
        Have you deceiv’d me thus? did I engage
        My whole estate for this?
          S. ALEX. You ask’d no favour,
        And you shall find as little: since my comforts
        Play false with me, I’ll be as cruel to thee
        As grief to fathers’ hearts.
          MOLL. Why, what’s the matter with you,
        ’Less too much joy should make your age forgetful?
        Are you too well, too happy?
          S. ALEX. With a vengeance!
          MOLL. Methinks you should be proud of such a daughter,
        As good a man as your son.
          S. ALEX. O monstrous impudence!
          MOLL. You had no note before, an unmark’d knight;
        Now all the town will take regard on you,
        And all your enemies fear you for my sake:
        You may pass where you list, through crowds most thick,
        And come off bravely with your purse unpick’d.
        You do not know the benefits I bring with me;
        No cheat dares work upon you with thumb[1205] or knife,
        While you’ve a roaring girl to your son’s wife.
          S. ALEX. A devil rampant!
          S. GUY. Have you so much charity
        Yet to release me of my last rash bargain,
        And I’ll give in your pledge?
          S. ALEX. No, sir, I stand to’t;
        I’ll work upon advantage, as all mischiefs
        Do upon me.
          S. GUY. Content. Bear witness all, then,
        His are the lands; and so contention ends:
        Here comes your son’s bride ’twixt two noble friends.

            _Enter_ LORD NOLAND _and_ SIR BEAUTEOUS GANYMEDE
                _with_ MARY FITZALLARD _between them_; GALLIPOT,
                TILTYARD, OPENWORK, _and their Wives_.

          MOLL. Now are you gull’d as you would be; thank me
           for’t,
        I’d a forefinger in’t.
          SEB. Forgive me, father!
        Though there before your eyes my sorrow feign’d,
        This still was she for whom true love complain’d.
          S. ALEX. Blessings eternal, and the joys of angels,
        Begin your peace here to be sign’d in heaven!
        How short my sleep of sorrow seems now to me,
        To this eternity of boundless comforts,
        That finds no want but utterance and expression!
        My lord, your office here appears so honourably,
        So full of ancient goodness, grace, and worthiness,
        I never took more joy in sight of man
        Than in your comfortable presence now.
          L. NOL. Nor I more delight in doing grace to virtue
        Than in this worthy gentlewoman your son’s bride,
        Noble Fitzallard’s daughter, to whose honour
        And modest fame I am a servant vow’d;
        So is this knight.
          S. ALEX. Your loves make my joys proud.
        Bring forth those deeds of land my care laid ready,
            [_Exit Servant, who presently returns with deeds._'
        And which, old knight, thy nobleness may challenge,
        Join’d with thy daughter’s virtues, whom I prize now
        As dearly as that flesh I call mine own.
        Forgive me, worthy gentlewoman; ’twas my blindness:
        When I rejected thee, I saw thee not;
        Sorrow and wilful rashness grew like films
        Over the eyes of judgment; now so clear
        I see the brightness of thy worth appear.
          MARY. Duty and love may I deserve in those!
        And all my wishes have a perfect close.
          S. ALEX. That tongue can never err, the sound’s so
             sweet.
        Here, honest son, receive into thy hands
        The keys of wealth, possession of those lands
        Which my first care provided; they’re thine own;
        Heaven give thee a blessing with ’em! the best joys
        That can in worldly shapes to man betide
        Are fertile lands and a fair fruitful bride,
        Of which I hope thou’rt sped.
          SEB. I hope so too, sir.
          MOLL. Father and son, I ha’ done you simple service
             here.
          SEB. For which thou shalt not part, Moll, unrequited.
          S. ALEX. Thou’rt a mad girl, and yet I cannot now
        Condemn thee.
          MOLL. Condemn me? troth, and[1206] you should, sir,
        I’d make you seek out one to hang in my room:
        I’d give you the slip at gallows, and cozen the people.
        Heard you this jest, my lord?
          L. NOL. What is it, Jack?
          MOLL. He was in fear his son would marry me,
        But never dreamt that I would ne’er agree.
          L. NOL. Why, thou had’st a suitor once, Jack: when
             wilt marry?
          MOLL. Who, I, my lord? I’ll tell you when, i’faith;
        When you shall hear
        Gallants void from sergeants’ fear,
        Honesty and truth unslander’d,
        Woman mann’d, but never pander’d,
        Cheats[1207] booted, but not coach’d,
        Vessels older ere they’re broach’d;
        If my mind be then not varied,
        Next day following I’ll be married.
          L. NOL. This sounds like doomsday.
          MOLL. Then were marriage best;
        For if I should repent, I were soon at rest.
          S. ALEX. In troth thou’rt a good wench: I’m sorry now
        The opinion was so hard I conceiv’d of thee:

                           _Enter_ TRAPDOOR.

        Some wrongs I’ve done thee.
          TRAP. Is the wind there now?
        ’Tis time for me to kneel and confess first,
        For fear it come too late, and my brains feel it.
                                                      [_Aside._
          Upon my paws I ask you pardon, mistress!
          MOLL. Pardon! for what, sir? what has your rogueship
             done now?
          TRAP. I’ve been from time to time hir’d to confound
             you
        By this old gentleman.
          MOLL. How?
          TRAP. Pray, forgive him:
        But may I counsel you, you should never do’t.
        Many a snare t’ entrap your worship’s life
        Have I laid privily; chains, watches, jewels;
        And when he saw nothing could mount you up,
        Four hollow-hearted angels[1208] he then gave you,
        By which he meant to trap you, I to save you.
          S. ALEX. To all which shame and grief in me cry
             guilty.
        Forgive me: now I cast the world’s eyes from me,
        And look upon thee freely with mine own,
        I see the most of many wrongs before me,[1209]
        Cast from the jaws of Envy and her people,
        And nothing foul but that. I’11 never more
        Condemn by common voice, for that’s the whore
        That deceives man’s opinion, mocks his trust,
        Cozens his love, and makes his heart unjust.
          MOLL. Here be the angels, gentlemen; they were
        As a musician: I pursue no pity;
        Follow the law, and[1210] you can cuck[1211] me, spare
           not;
        Hang up my viol by me, and I care not.
          S. ALEX. So far I’m sorry, I’ll thrice double ’em,
        To make thy wrongs amends.
        Come, worthy friends, my honourable lord,
        Sir Beauteous Ganymede, and noble Fitzallard,
        And you kind gentlewomen,[1212] whose sparkling presence
        Are glories set in marriage, beams of society,
        For all your loves give lustre to my joys:
        The happiness of this day shall be remember’d
        At the return of every smiling spring;
        In my time now ’tis born; and may no sadness
        Sit on the brows of men upon that day,
        But as I am, so all go pleas’d away!   [_Exeunt omnes._


                               EPILOGUE.

        A painter having drawn with curious art
        The picture of a woman, every part
        Limn’d to the life, hung out the piece to sell.
        People who pass’d along, viewing it well,
        Gave several verdicts on it: some disprais’d
        The hair; some said the brows too high were rais’d;
        Some hit her o’er the lips, mislik’d their colour;
        Some wish’d her nose were shorter; some, the eyes
           fuller;
        Others said roses on her cheeks should grow,
        Swearing they look’d too pale; others cried no.
        The workman still, as fault was found, did mend it,
        In hope to please all: but this work being ended,
        And hung open at stall, it was so vile,
        So monstrous, and so ugly, all men did smile
        At the poor painter’s folly. Such, we doubt,
        Is this our comedy: some perhaps do flout
        The plot, saying, ’tis too thin, too weak, too mean;
        Some for the person will revile the scene,
        And wonder that a creature of her being
        Should be the subject of a poet, seeing
        In the world’s eye none weighs so light: others look
        For all those base tricks, publish’d in a book[1213]
        Foul as his brains they flow’d from, of cutpurse[s],
        Of nips and foists, nasty, obscene discourses,
        As full of lies as empty of worth or wit,
        For any honest ear or eye unfit.
        And thus,
        If we to every brain that’s humorous
        Should fashion scenes, we, with the painter, shall,
        In striving to please all, please none at all.
        Yet for such faults as either the writer’s wit
        Or negligence of the actors do commit,
        Both crave your pardons: if what both have done
        Cannot full pay your expectation,
        The Roaring Girl herself, some few days hence,
        Shall on this stage give larger recompence.
        Which mirth that you may share in, herself does woo you,
        And craves this sign, your hands to beckon her to you.




                            END OF VOL. II.








                                LONDON:
                PRINTED BY LEVEY, ROBSON, AND FRANKLYN,
                         46 St. Martin’s Lane.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Footnotes

-----

# 1:

          _Kix_] I may just remark that this name is intended
          to describe the person who bears it, an elderly
          gentleman: _kix_ (or, as it is generally written,
          _kex_) means a dry stalk.

# 2:

          _bring_] Old eds. “brings.”

# 3:

          _ordinary_] See note, vol. i. p. 389.

# 4:

          _brothel_] i.e. harlot: so in a passage of Greene’s
          _Groats-worth of Wit_ (quoted in my Account of Greene
          and his writings, p. xxx., prefixed to his _Works_),
          “brother to a _brothell_ he kept.” The word was at an
          early period applied to the worthless of both sexes.

# 5:

          _Long-acre_] “Probably the name of the estate Witgood
          had mortgaged to his uncle.”—_Edit. of 1816._

# 6:

          _out of the compass of law_] i.e. out of the reach of,
          not punishable by, law.

# 7:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I have.”

# 8:

          _were_] Old eds. “was.”

# 9:

          _Fate_, &c.] Qy. was the whole of this speech
          originally blank verse?

# 10:

          _Come_, &c.] The editor of 1816 printed,

           “_Come, I must help; where left you? I’ll proceed_,”

          without mentioning the reading of the old eds.,
          which I have followed, and which (though this
          scene is probably more than slightly corrupted in
          several places) I believe to be right. Middleton
          sometimes, when he introduces a couplet, shews
          perfect indifference about the length of the first
          line: see note, vol. i. p. 424, and compare the
          following passage of _The Phœnix_;

                  “Without thee,
                  All the whole world were soiled bastardy.”

          vol. i. p. 351, (where, in my note, I too hastily
          remarked that part of the first line had probably
          dropt out).

# 11:

          _valiant_] i.e. worth.

# 12:

          _furnished_] The editor of 1816 prints “finish’d.”

# 13:

          _Enter Onesiphorus Hoard, Limber, and Kix_] In the
          old eds. the entrance of these “right worshipful
          seniors” is not marked, and the prefixes to their
          speeches are merely 1., 2., and 3. That one of them
          is Onesiphorus Hoard, there can be no doubt. That
          the other two are Limber and Kix, is, I think, as
          certain: they appear together with Onesiphorus in
          the last scene of the play, where they are addressed
          as “_old_ master Limber and master Kix,” and where
          they immediately recognise the Courtesan.—The editor
          of 1816 makes the stage-direction here “_Enter Two
          Gentlemen_:” he ought at least to have observed,
          that the speech which concludes this scene is given
          to a _third_ speaker.

# 14:

          _You’ve_] Old eds. “You have.”

# 15:

          _the viol_] i.e. the _viol de gambo_, which in those
          days it was the fashion for ladies to play.

# 16:

          _laying_] “Is used in the same sense by Jack Cade in
          the ‘Second Part of Henry VI.’ (Act iv. scene x.)
          ‘These five days have I hid me in these woods, and
          durst not peep out, for all the country is _lay’d_ for
          me.’” _Editor of 1816_.

# 17:

          _slight_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 18:

          _A Street_] i.e. in London, which continues to be the
          place of action during the rest of the play.

# 19:

          _Enter_, &c.] Old eds. “_Enter_ at seuerall doores.”

# 20:

          _affront_] i.e. encounter, face.

# 21:

          _wipes his nose_] i.e. cheats him: the expression is
          of frequent occurrence; but not so the following one,
          which has the same meaning,—“’Twould anger any man to
          be _nos’d_ of such a match.” Brome’s _English Moor_,
          p. 7.—_Five New Plays_, 1659.

# 22:

          _brothel-master_] See note, p. 5.

# 23:

          _Pecunius_] Though the word here is not printed with a
          capital letter in the old eds., we learn from a
          subsequent scene that it is the Christian name of
          Lucre.

# 24:

          _manent_] Old eds. “manet”—which I mention, because
          the editor of 1816 makes Freedom and Moneylove _enter_
          after the others have gone out.

# 25:

          _crank_] i.e. brisk.

# 26:

          _masty_] i.e. mastiff.

# 27:

          _a noble_] A gold coin worth 6_s_. 8_p_.

# 28:

          _trampler of the law_] Taylor, the water-poet, begins
          the account of “A Corrupted Lawyer, and a Knauish
          Vndershriue,” with the following lines;

            “A hall, a hall, the _tramplers_ are at hand,
            A shifting Master, and as sweetly man’d;
            His Buckram-bearer, one that knowes his ku,
            Can write with one hand and receiue with two.
            The _trampler_ is in hast, O cleere the way,
            Takes fees with both hands cause he cannot stay,
            No matter wheth’r the cause be right or wrong,
            So hee be payd for letting out his tongue.”
               _A Brood of Cormorants_, p. 13; _Workes_, 1630.
          In Brome’s _Sparagus Garden_, 1640 (acted 1635), one
          of the characters is a lawyer named _Trampler_.

# 29:

          _galleasses_] Large, heavy, low-built vessels: see
          Steevens’s note on Shakespeare’s _Taming of a Shrew_,
          act ii. sc. 1.

# 30:

          _motions of Fleet Street, and visions of Holborn_] The
          editor of 1816 says that he “knows not _exactly_ what
          these visions were:” nor do I: they are evidently used
          here as a cant term, like the words with which they
          are coupled—_tramplers_ (see note in the preceding
          page), and _motions_ (i.e. puppet-shows, puppets: see
          note, vol. i. p. 229.)

# 31:

          _trashed_] The following passage of _The Puritan_, “a
          guarded lackey to run before it [a coach], and pied
          liveries to come _trashing_ after it,” act iv. sc. 1,
          which is cited here by the editor of 1816, is given by
          Todd in his additions to Johnson’s _Dict._ as an
          example of _trash_ in the sense of—to follow with
          bustle, to tramp about with fatigue; and such seems to
          be the meaning of the word in our text.

# 32:

          _bull-beggars_] i.e. hobgoblins—a word of uncertain
          derivation.

# 33:

          _he calls me thief_] Because _good fellow_ was one of
          the cant terms for a thief.

# 34:

          _take me with you_] i.e. let me understand you.

# 35:

          _resolve_] i.e. satisfactorily inform.

# 36:

          _pax_] For pox,—perhaps an affected mode of
          pronouncing the word: it occurs frequently in
          Middleton. See my note on Webster’s _Works_, vol. iii.
          p. 195.

# 37:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 38:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 39:

          _sir_] So ed. 1616. Not in first ed.

# 40:

          _companions_] i.e. scurvy fellows,—in which sense the
          word was often used.

# 41:

          _blue coats have been turned into cloaks_] Every
          reader of our early dramas is aware that blue was the
          colour usually worn by servants: from the present
          passage it appears that their coats had been recently
          exchanged for cloaks, like those which gentlemen then
          wore.

# 42:

          _trow_] i.e. think you.

# 43:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 44:

          _brothel-master_] See note, p. 5.

# 45:

          _’Twas_] Old eds. “It was.”

# 46:

          _kept it_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “_it kept_.”

# 47:

          _push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 48:

          _somner_]—_sumner_, _summoner_—i.e. apparitor.

# 49:

          _Cole-Harbour_] See note on act iv. sc. 1.

# 50:

          _a’ life_] See note, vol. i. p. 272.

# 51:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 52:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 53:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 54:

          _about_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “above.”

# 55:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 56:

          _again_] i.e. against.

# 57:

          _of_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “a.”

# 58:

          _make a bolt or a shaft on’t_] “This is a proverbial
          expression, and is enumerated by Ray in his Collection
          of Proverbial Phrases. The meaning is, that he would
          immediately try his fortune with the widow, and either
          be rejected or accepted. The same expression is used
          by Slender in the _Merry Wives of Windsor_, act. iii.
          sc. 4. See notes on the passage.” _Editor of 1816_.

# 59:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 60:

          _Remove me, &c._] “This and the next speech of
          Witgood’s form a couplet, and are, I am inclined to
          think, a quotation.” _Editor of 1816_.

# 61:

          _sure yet to_] Compare Brome:

              “RA. Who do you think
                  Has married fair Mistris Millicent?
               DI. Theophilus (I can name him, though his father
                  Was fatal unto mine) was _sure to_ her.”
                    _The English Moor_, p. 3.—_Five New Playes_,
                       1659.
              “ER. Then you are _sure to_ her.
               MAT. No, I never us’d
                   A marriage-question, nor a wooing word,” &c.
                            _The New Academy_, p. 19. _ibid._

# 62:

          _resolved_] i.e. convinced, satisfied.

# 63:

          _I am_] Old eds. “I’m.”

# 64:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 65:

          _the better term_] “Ladies of easy virtue were, in the
          time of our poet, frequently called _termers_, from
          their visiting the city when the courts of justice
          were open, and the inns of court filled with young
          lawyers: to this, I conceive, Witgood alludes.”
          _Editor of 1816._—Witgood seems to use the word _term_
          with a playful allusion to the double meaning of
          _suitors_.

# 66:

          _blue coats_] see note, p. 26.

# 67:

          _royals_] See note, vol. i, p. 345.

# 68:

          _their_] i.e. Witgood’s and his uncle’s.

# 69:

          _censure_] i.e. opinion, judgment.

# 70:

          _So help us our best fortunes_ “The declaration of
          this gentleman somewhat resembles the oath taken by
          grand jurymen respecting their presentations, and was
          probably formed on that model.” _Editor of 1816._

# 71:

          _lie_] Old eds. “lies.”

# 72:

          _push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 73:

          _slight_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 74:

          _Cole-Harbour_] See note on act iv. sc. 1.

# 75:

          _likes_] i.e. pleases.

# 76:

          _Beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 77:

          _days_] Altered by the editor of 1816 to “delays:” but
          I believe the old text is right. So in act iv. sc. 5,
          Dampit says of one who owed him money, “he comes to
          have a longer _day_.”

# 78:

          _prevent_] i.e. anticipate.

# 79:

          _resolv’d_] See note, p. 39.

# 80:

          _Gentlemen_] As Lamprey and Spichcock appear
          afterwards with Hoard at Cole-Harbour, they ought
          perhaps to be with him on the present occasion. I
          suspect, indeed, that some of the speeches given here,
          and in a former scene, to _Gentlemen_, belong,
          properly, to these two worthies.

# 81:

          _a Dutch widow_] A cant term, sufficiently explained
          by what follows.

# 82:

          _very_] So ed. 1616. Not in first ed.

# 83:

          _prigging_] “_Prig_, in the cant language of that
          age, meant _thief_, or pickpocket. It is found in
          Shakespeare, and Beaumont and Fletcher.” _Editor of
          1816._—_Prigging_ is used in this passage merely as
          a jocular term of reproach.

# 84:

          _’Las_] Old eds. “asse,”—the initial letter having
          dropt out in the first ed.

# 85:

          _Ay, boy_] Old eds. “I bee.”

# 86:

          _making_] i.e. matching: in our early writers _make_
          is often used for mate.

# 87:

          _Luc._] Ed. 1616, “_Wit_.”

# 88:

          _Cole-Harbour_] See note on act iv. sc. 1.

# 89:

          _we’ve_] Old eds. “we have.”

# 90:

          _anno_ 89] “Both the quartos read ‘99;’ but Stow does
          not mention any _very_ great storm in that year,
          although he has noticed one or two; whereas in the
          year 1589, he observes, that on ‘The 1st August, at
          night, was the greatest lightning and thunder that
          had, at any time, bin seene or heard about London in
          the memory of any man living; and yet, thankes be
          given to God, little hurt heard of.’” _Editor of
          1816._—See Stow’s _Annales_, p. 757. ed. 1631.

# 91:

          _mought, and_] i.e. might, if.

# 92:

          _years_] Qy. “days?”

# 93:

          _make you unready_] i.e. undress you.

# 94:

          _cony-catching_] See note, vol. i. p. 290.

# 95:

          _doubts_] i.e. fears.

# 96:

          _Cole-Harbour_] The stage-direction in the old eds. is
          “_Enter at Cole-harbour, Hoord, the Widdow, and
          Gentlemen, he married now._”—_Cole-Harbour_ (a
          corruption of _Cold-Harbour_, or _Cold-Harborough_)
          was an ancient building, situated in the parish of
          All-hallows the Less, in Downgate Ward: see an account
          of it in Stow’s _Survey_, b. ii. p. 206. (vol. i.) ed.
          1720. A good many years before the date of this play,
          the then Earl of Shrewsbury took it down, and built a
          number of small tenements in its stead, which were let
          at great rents, and served as a retreat for debtors,
          &c.; the place being considered a sort of sanctuary,
          probably because Tunstall, bishop of Durham, had
          resided there in Henry the Eighth’s reign. Lodge says,
          “It was pulled down by Earl Gilbert, about the year
          1600.” _Illust. of Brit. Hist._ vol. i. p. 9: but its
          demolition must have been earlier; for, in Nash’s
          _Haue with you to Saffron Walden_, 1596, we find, “Or
          hast thou tooke thee a chamber in _Cole-harbour_?” &c.
          sig. D. 4. From the present scene, as the editor of
          1816 observes in a note on act ii. sc. 1, “it may be
          inferred that it was notorious as a place where
          marriages were solemnised hastily and without the
          proper forms; such as the Fleet Prison and Keith’s
          Chapel were for some time previously to the passing
          the marriage-act.” He adds, that “the only [other]
          allusion he recollects to it among the dramatic
          writers of the time, is in our author’s _Roaring
          Girl_:” but half-a-dozen might easily be furnished.

# 97:

          _pig-eater_] An odd term of endearment: _pigsnie_ is
          common enough.

# 98:

          _Court._] Old eds. “_Luc._”

# 99:

          _friends_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “friend.”

# 100:

          _believe’t_] Old eds. “_believe_ it.”

# 101:

          _I have no son_, &c.] See what I have said on couplets
          imperfect in the first line, notes p. 7 of the present
          vol., and p. 424 of vol. i.

# 102:

          _you’re_] Old eds. “you are.”

# 103:

          _Ha, ha!_] Old eds. “_ha_, _ha_, ha.”

# 104:

          _And_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “I [ay] _and_.”—The
          speech is part of the first line of a couplet.

# 105:

          _O man in lamentation_] In _The Old Wives’ Tale_, “the
          tune of _O man in desperation_” is mentioned: see
          Peele’s _Works_, vol. i. p. 208 (ed. 1829), and my
          note there.

# 106:

          _now_] So ed. 1616. Not in first ed.

# 107:

          _passion_] i.e. sorrow.

# 108:

          _fie, fie_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “fie.”

# 109:

          _Byrlady_] A corruption of _By our Lady_.

# 110:

          _toy_] i.e. trifle.

# 111:

          _would I might be truss’d up_] Brome has the same poor
          play on words:

                                    “when Lodovico
          Does not prove _trustie_, then let me be _truss’d_.”
             _The Queen and Concubine_, p. 106.—_Five New
                Playes_, 1659.

# 112:

          _so_] First ed. “to.” Sec. ed. “too.”

# 113:

          _envy_] i.e. bear ill will.

# 114:

          _agen_] So written for the sake of the rhyme: compare
          vol. i. p. 416.

# 115:

          _thrum-chinned_] i.e. rough-chinned: see note, vol. i.
          p. 431.

# 116:

          _a’ life_] See note, vol. i. p. 272.

# 117:

          _hole i’ th’ counter_] See notes, vol. i. p. 392.

# 118:

          _froating_] “May mean _freting_ or adorning with
          fretwork. But Witgood’s vices, according to his
          own confession in a former scene, were those of
          sensuality, and not of foppery; and it is possible
          that this was the demand of the keeper of some
          brothel,” &c. &c. _Editor of 1816._—Perhaps so;
          but, I think, _froating_ means here nothing more
          than dressing up, repairing.

# 119:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 120:

          _desire_] Old eds. “desires.”

# 121:

          _First C._] Old eds. “_Cit._”

# 122:

          _nonce_] i.e. occasion.

# 123:

          _watchet_] i.e. blue: see note, p. 26.

# 124:

          _capes_] The editor of 1816 prints “_caps_,” which may
          be right.

# 125:

          _champion_] i.e. champaign.

             “These many ruts and furrows in thy cheek
             Proves thy old face to be but _champion_ ground
             Till’d with the plough of age.”
                 RANDOLPH’S _Hey for Honesty_, 1651, p. 36.

# 126:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 127:

          _like_] See note, p. 47.

# 128:

          _marquesse_] i.e. marchioness.

# 129:

          _pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 130:

          _venture_] Old eds. “ventures.”

# 131:

          _vild_] i.e. vile: see note, vol. i. p. 94.

# 132:

          _peevish_] i.e. foolish, trifling.

# 133:

          _set the hare’s head to the goose-giblet_] A not
          uncommon proverbial expression:

          “Since tit for tat (quoth I) on euen hand is set,
          _Set the hares head agaynst the goose ieblet_.”
             HEYWOOD’S _Dialogue, &c._, sig. G.—_Workes_, ed.
                1598.

# 134:

          _pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 135:

          _come_] Old eds. “came.”

# 136:

          _mark_] i.e. 13_s._ 4_d._

# 137:

          _immoveables_] So ed. 1616. First ed. “immouerables.”

# 138:

          _some access_] “The quarto of 1616 reads, ‘some
          _above_ access;’ and the niece [Joyce] speaks without
          a notice of her having entered: whereas in the first
          quarto there is a stage-direction, ‘She is _above_;’
          and I suppose the word caught the printer’s eye, and
          was erroneously introduced into the text.” _Editor of
          1816._

# 139:

          _a thousand year_] “Our poet alludes here [very
          irreverently] to a passage in the Revelation of St.
          John, chap. xx. ver. 2.” _Editor of 1816._

# 140:

          _But I think_] “It is unnecessary to observe there was
          something particular about Dampit’s bed; the reader,
          however, will collect all the information I could give
          him from this scene.” _Editor of 1816._

# 141:

          _muckinder_] i.e. a handkerchief.

# 142:

          _trampler_] See note, p. 18.

# 143:

          _the tavern bitch_, &c.] “One of the many proverbs
          expressive of inebriety.” _Editor of 1816._

# 144:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 145:

          _Ay, he changes_, &c.] “I scarcely need notice that
          Dampit’s explanation of the name is in allusion to the
          doctrine of _metempsychosis_, first taught by that
          philosopher.” _Editor of 1816._

# 146:

          _longer day_] “Dampit means to insinuate, I conceive,
          that he had borrowed money of him, and only called to
          postpone the payment.” _Editor of 1816._—

                            “You know this meeting
          Was for the creditors to give longer day.”
            BROME’S _City Wit_, act i. sc. 1.—_Five New Playes_,
               1653.

# 147:

          _farewell, and a thousand_] i.e. a thousand times
          farewell: see Peele’s _Works_, vol. i. p. 217. ed.
          1829, and my note there.

# 148:

          _device_] “For _advice_; I suppose it intentional.”
          _Editor of 1816._—Of course it is: so a clown in
          Randolph’s _Hey for Honesty_, 1651; “Ile tell you what
          I do _devise_ you now, this is my pinion,” act i. sc.
          1.

# 149:

          _this geer will fadge well_] i.e. this matter will fit
          well, succeed well.

# 150:

          _dive-dapper_] i.e. dabchick.

# 151:

          _a Dutch widow_] See note, p. 50.

# 152:

          Virg. _Æn._ iii. 658.

# 153:

          _trampling_] See note, p. 18.

# 154:

          _Welch ambassador_] “A jocular name for the cuckoo, I
          presume from its migrating hither from the west.”
          NARES’S _Gloss. in v._—Perhaps it was so called
          because

                  “the note which his hoarse voice doth beare
            Is harsh and fatall to the wedded eare.”
               _The Cuckow_ (by NICCOLS), 1607, sig. A 3.

# 155:

          _make haste to give up thy verdict_, &c.] Did Pope
          remember this passage?

           “The hungry judges soon the sentence sign,
           _And wretches hang, that jurymen may dine_.”
                               _The Rape of the Lock_, iii. 21.

# 156:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 157:

          _Now make your best_] Another couplet, of which the
          first line is imperfect: see notes, p. 7 of this vol.
          and p. 424 of vol. i.

# 158:

          _cupboard of plate_] i. e. a moveable sideboard, or
          buffet containing the plate.

# 159:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 160:

          _too_] Qy. was this originally a couplet?

# 161:

          _other ancient gentlemen_] Old eds. “an _other
          ancient_ gentleman:” but see what follows; and note,
          p. 9.

# 162:

          _guess_] i.e. guests: see note, vol. i. p. 326.

# 163:

          _smack_] Old eds. “smerck.”

# 164:

          _a Dutch widow_] See note, p. 50.

# 165:

          _junt_] i.e. harlot.

# 166:

          _pursu’d, nay_] Old eds. “_pursued_ me, _nay_.”

# 167:

          _where_] i.e. whereas.

# 168:

          _nuncle_] With this corruption of the word Shakespeare
          has made all readers acquainted.

# 169:

          _defy_] i.e. renounce.

# 170:

                      _The glances of a sinful eye,
                      Waving of fans_,
                         .   .   .   .   .   .
                      _All secret friends_]

          Here Middleton recollected the Palinode which closes
          _Cynthia’s Revels_:

             “From _secret friends_,
                .   .   .   .   .   .
             _From waving fans_, coy _glances_.”
                JONSON’S _Works_, vol. ii. p. 380, ed. Giff.

# 171:

          _fancy_] i.e. love.

# 172:

          _sign_] The editor of 1816 altered this word to
          “sin.”—According to the directions for bleeding in old
          almanacs, blood was to be taken from particular parts
          under particular planets.

                “_Alen._ When is the time to let the weathers
                   blood?
              The forward spring that had such store of grasse,
              Hath fild them full of ranke vnwholesome blood,
              Which must be purg’d, else when the winter comes,
              The rot will leaue me nothing but their skinnes.
                _Fall._ Chil let on blood, but yet it is no
                   time,
              Vntill _the zygne be gone below the hart_.”
                YARINGTON’S _Two Lamentable Tragedies_, 1601,
                   sig. H 4.

# 173:

                    _Stabbing of arms_
                      .  .  .  .  .  .
                    _Dutch flapdragons_]

          Here again (see note, p. 97) Middleton has an eye to
          Jonson:

               “_From stabbing of arms, flapdragons._”
                                             _Works_, ibid.

          To stab their arms with daggers, and drink off the
          blood mixed with wine, to the health of their
          mistresses, was formerly a frequent practice among
          gallants.—For _flapdragons_, see note, vol. i. p. 66:
          from several passages in our early dramas, it appears
          that the Dutch were celebrated for swallowing them.—
          Drinking _healths in urine_ was another and more
          disgusting feat of gallantry.

# 174:

          _defy_] See note, p. 97.

# 175:

                 _termers_] i.e. persons (generally of ill
                 repute) who resorted to London during
                 term-time.

# 176:

                 _Prologue_] The first line of it and a
                 word in the fourth line have dropt out at
                 press.

# 177:

          The old ed. has (what is generally wanting in early
          4tos) a list of the characters. The only alteration I
          have made in it is the substitution of “SHRIMP” for
          “SMELT,” the precocious youth being always throughout
          the play introduced under, and addressed by, the
          former name.

# 178:

          _’a_] For _he_ occurs over and over again in this
          drama.

# 179:

          _great-breeched gallants_] i.e. gallants who wear
          _trunk-hose_—breeches swelled out to a preposterous
          size by stuffings of rags, wool, hair, &c.

# 180:

          _a cold heat_, &c.] Here, perhaps, the doctor meant to
          rhyme.

# 181:

          _affections_] Qy. here and in the next line but two,
          for the sake of the verse, _affects_—which in our
          early poetry has the same meaning.

# 182:

          _ask_] Old ed. “axe,” which, though the genuine Saxon
          form of the word, and perhaps used here by Middleton,
          is now considered so ludicrous a vulgarism, that I
          have substituted the modern spelling.

# 183:

          _overture_] i.e. overthrow.

# 184:

          _vadeth_] Brathwait (_Strappado for the Diuell_, 1615,
          p. 53) has,

            “Thy form’s diuine, no _fading_, _vading_ flower;”

          and Spenser and other poets use _vade_ as a rhyme to
          _fade_: but though the words were considered as
          different, it would not be easy to assign a distinct
          meaning to each.

# 185:

          _And it like_] i.e. if it please.

# 186:

          _Maria ascends_] So old ed.—i.e. goes into the upper
          chamber which Glister has just mentioned.

# 187:

          _tall_] i.e. brave, bold.

# 188:

          _a cross_, &c.] Old ed. “_to cross_,” &c.—_Creeping to
          the cross_ was a ceremony of penance imposed by the
          Romish Church.

# 189:

          _giglot_] i.e. wanton.

# 190:

          _gill_] i.e. girl, wench.

# 191:

          _A valued price_, &c.] i.e. a price equal in value to
          her inestimable worth.

# 192:

          _unvalued_] Old ed. “in valued,”—which, as one word,
          might stand; but see the next speech.

# 193:

          _unvalued worth_, &c.] This passage seems to be
          corrupted. For the benefit of those who are not
          familiar with “small 4tos,” I subjoin it as exhibited
          in the old ed.

          “Vnvalued worth, ha ha ha! Why? shees but a woman,
          And they are windy turning veins, loue light as chaffe
             which when
          Our nourishing graynes are winnow’d from them,
          Vnconstantly they flye at the least wind of passion
          A womans eye, can turne it selfe with quick
             dexterity.”

# 194:

          _friend_] Old ed. “fend.”

# 195:

          _pitchy_] Old ed. “pithie.”

# 196:

          _Wo’t_] Or Wu’t—a corruption of _will_.

# 197:

          _Farewell_] An imperfect couplet: see notes, p. 7 of
          this vol. and p. 424 of vol. i.

# 198:

          _Lip. A plague_, &c.] What I have here assigned to
          Lipsalve is given to Gerardine in the old ed.

# 199:

          _under colour of dissuasion_] Like another young lady,
          in Chapman’s _May Day_, 1611:

          “_Æmilia._ But good cuze, if you chance to see my
          chamber window open, that is upon the tarrasse, doe
          not let him come in at it in any case.

          _Lodovico._ ’Sblood how can he? can he come over the
          wall think’st?

          _Æmilia._ O sir, you men have not devices with ladders
          of ropes to scale such walles at your pleasure, and
          abuse us poore wenches!” p. 22.

# 200:

          _apparance_] i.e. appearance.

# 201:

          _instance_] i.e. proof.

# 202:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 203:

          _country_] Old ed. “cuntries.”

# 204:

          _feast_] Old ed. “feasts.”

# 205:

          _Bocardo_] i.e. a dungeon, a prison,—properly, the old
          north gate of Oxford, which served as a prison. The
          gate no longer exists, having been pulled down in
          1771; but the syllogism from which it seems to have
          derived its name still torments the students of that
          university, in the pages of Aldrich’s _Logic_.

# 206:

          _grincomes_] i.e. the venereal disease.

# 207:

          _great breeches_] See note, p. 111.

# 208:

          _honesty_] Old ed. “honestyes.”

# 209:

          _then_] Old ed. “that.”

# 210:

          _a cross_] See note, vol. i. p. 246.

# 211:

          _by_ (     )] So the old ed., the author having used
          some expression which the printer was afraid to
          insert. Copies of early plays frequently occur in
          which words have been struck through with a pen,
          perhaps by some public authority. I possess several
          pieces by Marston, from which the objectionable words
          have been cut out.

# 212:

          _refused their_] Old ed. “_refused_ them _their_.”

# 213:

          _cony-skins_] i.e. rabbit-skins.

# 214:

          _statutes staple_] “The mercer, hee followeth the
          young vpstart gentleman, that hath no gouernement of
          himselfe, and he feedeth his humour to goe braue: hee
          shall not want silkes, sattins, veluets, to pranke
          abroad in his pompe; but with this prouiso, that hee
          must binde ouer his land in a _statute-merchant
          or staple_: and so at last forfeit all vnto the
          mercilesse mercer, and leaue himselfe neuer a foot of
          ground in England.” GREENE’S _Quip for an Vpstart
          Courtier_, sig. F 3. ed. 1620.

# 215:

          _how go the squares_] Old ed. “_how goes_,” &c.—i.e.
          how goes on the game?—(chess-boards being full of
          squares). “What, fellow Robin, _how goes the squares_
          with you?” _Wily Beguilde_, sig. E 4. ed. 1623.

# 216:

          _a play, where we saw most excellent Sampson_, &c.]
          From Henslowe’s MSS. we learn that “_Sampson_, by
          Samuel Rowley and Edw. Iubye,” was acted in July 1602:
          see Malone’s _Shakespeare_ (by Boswell), vol. iii. p.
          327. To this drama (which has not come down to us)
          Middleton perhaps alludes.

# 217:

          _the youths_] i.e. the children of Paul’s, or some of
          the other theatrical children then performing.

# 218:

          _the upper stage_] Was a balcony at the back of the
          stage, its platform being raised probably eight or
          nine feet from the ground. It served for a window, &c.
          &c. &c.—the frequently occurring direction in our
          early plays, “enter _above_,” meaning “enter _on the
          upper stage_.”

# 219:

          _tongues_] Old ed. “bones.”

# 220:

          _presents_] Old ed. “presence.”

# 221:

          _sustain_] Old ed. “sustained.”

# 222:

          _shoes_] Old ed. “showes:” in act ii. sc. 4, mistress
          Glister says, “I pray, let’s have no _polluted feet_
          nor rheumatic chaps enter the house; I shall have my
          floor look more greasy,” &c.: and a little after, “Let
          them come in, _if their feet be clean_.”

# 223:

          _consort_] i.e. company of musicians.

# 224:

          _tickles the minikin_] “Minikin,” says Nares (_Gloss._
          in v.), "seems sometimes to have meant _treble_ in
          music."—It certainly also meant a fiddle: “when I was
          a young man and could _tickle the Minikin_ ... but now
          ... I am falne from the Fiddle,” &c. “A Fidler,
          when he hath crackt his _Minikin_.” _Jacke Drums
          Entertainement_, sigs. A 3, E 3, ed. 1616.

# 225:

          _what d’ye lack_] See note, vol. i. p. 447.

# 226:

          _lovely_] Old ed. “liuely.”

# 227:

          _thine_] Old ed. “then.”

# 228:

          _rogation_] From the preceding words, “thou hast been
          a long vagrant,” I suspect that a pun is intended
          here: to _rogue_ meant—to play the vagrant.

# 229:

          _gird_] i.e. cut, gibe.

# 230:

          _leave him_] Old ed. “loues theame.”

# 231:

          _bounty obliges_, &c.] Old ed. “_bounty obliges men
          too’t, giues mony for scrips and scrolls, and
          liberality seald_,” &c.

# 232:

          _make_] Old ed. “makes.”

# 233:

          _lectuary_] i.e. electuary.

# 234:

          _angle_] i.e. corner.

# 235:

          _prevent_] See note, p. 49.

# 236:

          _&c._] See note, vol. i. p. 252.

# 237:

          _liver_] Was supposed to be the seat of love.

# 238:

          _I pray_, &c.] The first part of this speech is
          addressed to a servant off the stage.

# 239:

          _the prick and praise_] So in _The London Prodigall_,
          1605: “tho she had _the pricke and praise_ for a
          prettie wench.” Sig. E 3. Spenser has, _Faery Queene_,
          ii. xii. 1,

                                   “her adorned head
             To _prick of highest praise_ forth to advance.”

          The _prick_ was the point or mark in the centre of the
          butts in archery.

# 240:

          _niceness_] i.e. scrupulousness, over-delicacy.

# 241:

          _Of no proportion_, &c.] Old ed.

                 “Respectlesse, _of no proportion_,” &c.

          “_Respectless_” is probably a word which the author
          had originally written, but forgot to erase. In the
          address _To the Reader_ (p. 107) he mentions the
          “faults in the printing.”

# 242:

          _No marvel_] May be right perhaps, if mistress Glister
          is speaking ironically; but qy. “_Now I_ marvel.”

# 243:

          _sect_] i.e. sex: the word in this sense is of
          frequent occurrence in old writers.

# 244:

          _Society_, &c.] Old ed.

             “_Society in_ nuptiall beds aboue these _joys_.”

          In the MS., I suppose, the word “_beds_,” for which
          Middleton had substituted “_nuptials_,” was not
          deleted: see note 244 supr.

# 245:

          _satiety_] Old ed. “society.”

# 246:

          _Vial_] Here, and afterwards in this scene, the old
          ed. prefixes _Nun_. (i.e. _Nuntius_) to his speeches.

# 247:

          _passions_] i.e. sorrowings.

# 248:

          _untrussing of his hose_] i.e. untying the points of
          his hose: see note, vol. i. p. 367.

# 249:

          _resolve_] See note, p. 23.

# 250:

          _mouse_] Was formerly a common term of endearment.

# 251:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 252:

          _footcloth_] See note, vol. i. p. 396.

# 253:

          _What should he be for a man?_] i.e. What man should
          he be?

# 254:

          _mistress_] Old ed. “master.”

# 255:

          _bruited_] i.e. reported.

# 256:

          _endear_] Old ed. “endeauour:” compare our author’s
          _Michaelmas Term_; “I’ll _be dear to you_, do but
          perform it,” vol. i. p. 478.

# 257:

          _resolve_] See note, p. 23.

# 258:

          _feed_] Old ed. “fed.”

# 259:

          _Servant_] Old ed. "One."—Perhaps Vial should be the
          person who enters.

# 260:

          _thou_] i.e. one of the whips: the other he presently
          gives to Gudgeon.

# 261:

          _resolves_] See note, p. 23.

# 262:

          _Re-enter Maria_] The stage-direction in the old ed.
          is “_Enter Maria ouer the trunke_;” and Middleton
          probably intended the spectators to suppose (for, as
          there was no moveable painted scenery when he wrote,
          they were obliged to suppose a great deal,) that the
          trunk, left on the stage by the apprentices, had been
          removed to Maria’s apartment since the exit of
          Glister. When she enters at the commencement of scene
          iv. (p. 133), the room is certainly not her own
          apartment: Gerardine is thought to have left the
          country, and she has the free range of the house.

# 263:

          _peize_] i.e. weigh down.

# 264:

          _thou’st_] Old ed. “thou hast.”

# 265:

          _prevented_] See note, p. 49.

# 266:

          _cautelous_] i.e. artfully cautious.

# 267:

          _Place_] Old ed. “Peace.”

# 268:

          _little-ease_] Was a cant term, used long before
          Middleton’s time, for the pillory, stocks, or bilboes,
          (and, as I suspect from several passages in our early
          writers, for some apartment in a prison);

                        “You dare not make discovery
          For feare of _Little-ease_. That were a prison
          Too fearful for such bravery to stoop into.”
             BROME’S _New Academy_, p. 58.—_Five New Playes_,
                1659.

# 269:

          _uneven_] i.e. unjust.

# 270:

          _unreduct_] i.e. unreduced.

# 271:

          _act_] Old ed. “art.”

# 272:

          _But who comes here_] In the old ed. these words are
          preceded by the stage-direction “_Enter Lipsalve and
          Shrimp his Page_;” and at the end of the speech
          Gerardine and Maria _exeunt_.
            I have already noticed (p. 142) the want of moveable
          painted scenery in Middleton’s days. Here the
          spectators were to suppose that Gerardine and Maria,
          standing on the upper-stage (see note, p. 125), were
          either in the apartment of the latter, or in the
          gallery communicating with it (see p. 112): when
          Lipsalve had entered, they were to suppose that the
          stage represented a street; and when Gerardine and
          Maria had re-appeared “_above_,” they were to suppose
          that the upper-stage was a window. Having found it
          necessary to begin a new scene with the entrance of
          Lipsalve, I hope my readers will be kind enough to
          _suppose_ that, when Gerardine says “_who comes
          here_,” he happens to turn his eye towards the window,
          and catches a glimpse of that gallant.

# 273:

          _loose_] Means, in archery, the discharging of the
          arrow.

# 274:

          _Maria appears_, &c.] The stage-direction in the old
          ed. is "_Enter Gerardine and Maria above_."—I may
          observe, that as curtains were suspended before the
          upper-stage (see note, p. 125), to conceal, if
          necessary, those who occupied it, they were probably
          used here for that purpose by Gerardine.

# 275:

          _o’ercomes_] Old ed. “ouercomes.”

# 276:

          _bruited_] See note, p. 138.

# 277:

          _cottens well_] i.e. succeeds, goes on well—an
          expression drawn, as the present passage indicates,
          from the manufacturing of cloth.

# 278:

          _hose_] i.e. breeches.

# 279:

          _in lavender_] i.e. in pawn.

# 280:

          _new for a_] Old ed. “_for a new_.”

# 281:

          _take her counsel, sir; get a cullis_] Maria had
          recommended a caudle (see p. 150): but we find in old
          writers a distinction made between cullises and
          caudles. A _cullis_ (which will be more particularly
          noticed hereafter) was a strong broth, a savoury
          jelly.

# 282:

          _flutterers_] Old ed. “flatterers.”

# 283:

          _petronel-flashes_] A _petronel_ is a carbine, a
          horseman’s gun.

# 284:

          _abrupt_] i.e. separated.

# 285:

          _small-ease_] See note, p. 145.

# 286:

          _our_] Some copies of the old ed. “or,” others “nor:”
          I have already noticed that, though they occasionally
          present different readings, there is but _one_ edition
          of the play: see p. 103.

# 287:

          _collowest_] i.e. begrimest, blackenest: she alludes
          to the smoke of the link. _Collow_ is smut from burnt
          coals.

# 288:

          _rine_] A vulgar corruption of _rind_: old ed.
          “rhyne;”

                  “Whose eyes doe shine
                  Like bacon rine.”
                     _Wily Beguilde_, sig C 2, ed. 1623.

# 289:

          _exercise_] See note, vol. i. p. 211.

# 290:

          _I hope my body has no organs_] “But the most
          dangerous of all was a Puritan Chandler ... he thought
          a man in a surplesse to be the Ghost of Heresy, _and
          was out of love with his owne members, because they
          were called Organs_.” MARMYON’S _Fine Companion_,
          1633, sig. I 4.

# 291:

          _exercise_] See note, vol. i. p. 211.

# 292:

          _byrlady_] See note, p. 66.

# 293:

          _the red letter_] Qy. does he allude to the rubrick
          distinctions in the Prayer-book, or to those in the
          Calendar?

# 294:

          _clergy_] i.e. doctrine.

# 295:

          _gear_] i.e. matter, business.

# 296:

          _in the Family_] The old ed. adds, as part of the
          text, “Let in;” but the words are a stage-direction.—
          In _The Displaying of the Family of Loue_, &c.
          (already mentioned, see p. 106), we are told: “They
          are called together euer in the night time: and
          commonly to suche houses as be far from neighbours,
          one of them doth alwayes warne an other: and when they
          come to the house of meeting, they knocke at the
          doore, saying, here is a Brother in Christ, or a
          Sister in Christ.” Sig. H iiii.

# 297:

          _peevish_] i.e. silly.

# 298:

          _exercise_] See note, vol. i. p. 211.

# 299:

          _trunks_] i.e. tubes. We find the word used in this
          sense even during Charles the Second’s time;

          “Through optic _trunk_ the planet seem’d to hear.”
             _To the King_—MARVELL’S _Works_, vol. ii. p. 124,
                ed. 1726.

# 300:

          _hit_] Old ed. “hits.”

# 301:

          _Scene V._] I have marked a new scene here, and
          another after Gudgeon has entered the chamber,
          contrary to the old ed. and the arrangements (or
          rather, non-arrangements) of our early stage: see
          note, p. 147.

# 302:

          _exercise_] See note, vol. i. p. 211.

# 303:

          _Hei mihi_, &c.] _Met._ i. 523.

# 304:

          _play at barriers_] i.e. fight within lists.

# 305:
          LIP. _Hold_, &c.; GUD. _Gogs_, &c.; LIP. _A pox_, &c.;
          GUD. _Truce_, &c.] Form only one speech in the old
          ed., with the prefix “_Ambo._”

# 306:

          _Cornelius’ tub_] i.e. the heated tub in which
          patients were sweated for the cure of the venereal
          disease: the origin of the term (see Douce’s _Illust.
          of Shake._ vol. ii. p. 70) is uncertain.

# 307:

          _suppositor_] i.e. suppository.—Old ed. "suppositar."—
          “I hold my life hee is a pottecarie, doe you neuer
          make no _suppositors_ sir?” _Cupids Whirligig_, sig. C
          4, ed. 1616.

# 308:

          _cockatrice_] A cant term for a harlot.

# 309:

          _Phitonessa’s power_] The word _Phitoness_—i.e.
          _Pythoness_—is of frequent occurrence in the works of
          our earliest poets. It generally means the witch of
          Endor:

              “And speke as renably, and faire, and wel,
              As to _the Phitonesse_ did Samuel.”
                  CHAUCER’S _Freres Tale_, v. 7091, ed. Tyr.

          See also Gower’s _Conf. Am._ fol. lxxiii. ed. 1554;
          Skelton’s “Adicyon” to _Phyllyp Sparowe_; Sir D.
          Lyndsay’s _Monarchie, Works_, vol. iii. p. 151, ed.
          Chal. Sometimes it is used in a more extended sense;

          “And _Phetonisses_, Charmeresses,” &c.
             CHAUCER’S _House of Fame_, fol. 267, _Works_, ed.
                1602.

          See also Lydgate’s _Warres of Troy_, sig. K vi. ed.
          1555.

# 310:

          _corpse of her friend_] Qy. “corps of her friends:” at
          p. 135, l. 6, _corps_ is used for bodies.

# 311:

          _thine aim_] Old ed. “thy plot, _thyne ayme_:” see
          note, p. 134.

# 312:

          _surcease_] i.e. cease.

# 313:

          _on_] Old ed. “in.”

# 314:

          _those_] Old ed. “these.”

# 315:

          _our clothes_] He means the dresses in which they were
          to pass for Familists: see what follows.

# 316:

          _Guttide_] i.e. Shrovetide.

# 317:

          _Hollantide_] A common corruption of Hallowstide.

# 318:

          _courtlike_] Old ed. “courttake.”

# 319:

          _make_] Old ed. “makes.”

# 320:

          _Lip._] Old ed. here and before the next speech which
          I have given to Lipsalve, “_Sa._”

# 321:

          _Master_, &c.] This speech has no prefix in the old
          ed.

# 322:

          _resolved_] See note, p. 39.

# 323:

          _nice_] See note, p. 134.

# 324:

          _private._ Whispers] Old ed. “_priuate_ whisper:” but
          the second word is a stage-direction.

# 325:

          _Galen_] Old ed. “Gallus.”

# 326:

          _eke_] i.e. also.

# 327:

          _five_] Old ed. “fine.”

# 328:

          _gear_] See note, p. 155.

# 329:

          _qd_——] Those who are acquainted with the sayings
          of _Titus Silus_ will probably understand this
          hieroglyphic.

# 330:

          _disguised as a porter_] These words are not in the
          old ed. From what follows in this scene we find that
          he wears a disguise, and we may justly conclude that
          it is no other than the porter’s dress in which he
          appears during the next scene.

# 331:

          _throne_] Qy. “shrine:” compare p. 163, l. 10.

# 332:

          _star-like_] Old ed. “warlike:” but see the next line.

# 333:

          _His_] Old ed. “This.”

# 334:

          _a bell and a clack-dish_] A _clack-dish_, or
          _clap-dish_, was a wooden dish with a moveable cover,
          which was carried by beggars, and which they _clacked_
          to shew that it was empty: see Steevens’s note on
          Shakespeare’s _Measure for Measure_, act iii. sc. 2.
          The _bell_ was another means of attracting attention.

# 335:

          _paritor_] i.e. apparitor—a messenger employed to cite
          persons to appear in the spiritual courts. The word is
          found so contracted not only in prose but in verse:

                “Belike thou art the Diuell’s _Parrator_,
                The basest officer that liues in Hell.”
                   _Wily Beguilde_, sig. H 3, ed. 1623.

# 336:

          _I play_] Old ed. “he plaies.”

# 337:

          _crier_] Old ed. “parritor.”

# 338:

          _crier_] Old ed. "sumner"—(i.e. apparitor). That the
          alterations which I have made in this dialogue between
          Gerardine and Dryfat are absolutely necessary, will
          appear from subsequent scenes. Of the “faults in the
          printing” Middleton was aware: see his address _To the
          Reader_, p. 107: he perhaps had at first assigned the
          parts of paritor, crier, and proctor differently; and
          after he had made a new distribution of them,
          neglected to alter this portion of the MS.

# 339:

          _time out of sight_] i.e. (I suppose) time that I was
          gone.

# 340:

          _perfection_] Old ed. “affecton.”

# 341:

          _celsitude_] i.e. height.

# 342:

          _Give_] Old ed. “Giues.”

# 343:

          _gazer loves_] Qy. “gazers’ love.”

# 344:

          _Than the Titanian_, &c.] Old ed.

             “_Then the_ Tartarians _God, when_ first _Egeons
                                 Hill_.”

          Ægeon (or, as he was called by the gods, Briareus,)
          was thrown under mount Ætna.

# 345:

          _worm’s bed_; _teeth_] Old ed. “worme bed, to the.”

# 346:

          _square_] i.e. (I suppose) fall to quarrelling.

# 347:

          _Mis. G._] Old ed. “Mar.”

# 348:

          _Orders of knaves_] _Their_ number was 25: see _Brit.
          Bibliogr._ vol. ii. p. 16, where they are each
          reckoned up from a tract, printed and probably
          compiled by Awdeley, called _The Fraternitye of
          Vacabondes, &c. Wherunto also is adioyned the_ XXV.
          _Orders of Knaues, otherwyse called a Quartern of
          Knaues, &c._, 4to, the first ed. of which appeared in
          1565: see _Typ. Antiq._ (ed. Dibdin), vol. iv. p. 564.

# 349:

          _startups_] Were a sort of clumsy shoes with high
          tops, worn by peasants. Cotgrave has “Guestres:
          Startups; high shooes, or gamashes for countrey
          folkes.”

# 350:

          _sir-reverence_] A corruption of _save-reverence_,
          _salva reverentia_: see Nares in V.

# 351:

          _Tweedles_] So the old ed. when the letter is
          afterwards read: here “_Sweedlesse_.”

# 352:

          _pert_] So old ed. afterwards: here it omits the word.

# 353:

          _towards_] i.e. in a state of preparation, at hand.

# 354:

          _seiz’d_] Old ed. “feard.”

# 355:

          _peasant groom_] Old ed. “pleasant Groine.”

# 356:

          _Europa’s sea-form_] I can only explain these words by
          supposing that they allude to Europa, as represented
          in ancient gems and pictures, holding the bull by the
          horns, while he bears her over the sea. Vide, for
          instance, the engraving prefixed to Fischer’s ed. of
          Palæphatus, 1772.

# 357:

          _acrostic_] i.e. crossed on his breast: perhaps some
          pun is intended here.

# 358:

          _A pile_, &c.] This speech has no prefix in the old
          ed.

# 359:

          _manable_] i.e. (I presume) bold, forward, ready.

# 360:

          _trow_] See note, p. 26.

# 361:

          _passion_] See note, p. 64.

# 362:

          _paritor_] See note, p. 170.

# 363:

          _Gud. Off_, &c.] Old ed. “_Gud._ Off boyes, Shrimpe
          what dost thou,” &c.

# 364:

          _Shrimp_] Old ed. “Periwincle.”

# 365:

          _sumner_] See note, p. 29.

# 366:

          _paritor_] See note, p. 170.

# 367:

          _Thrum_] Old ed. “Thum.”

# 368:

          _And Tipple_, &c.] This part of Gerardine’s speech is
          given to “_Gud._” in the old ed.

# 369:

          _colour_] i.e. pretence.

# 370:

          _paritor_] See note, p. 170.

# 371:

          _cucking-stool_] i.e. a stool or chair at the end of a
          long pole, in which scolds, &c. being placed, were
          plunged into some muddy pool or stinking pond: see
          Brand’s _Pop. Antiq._ vol. ii. p. 441, ed. 1813.

# 372:

          _come_] Old ed. “comes.”

# 373:

          _this gear cottens_] See notes, p. 150, 155.

# 374:

          _colour_] See note, p. 184.

# 375:

          _like_] See note, p. 113.

# 376:

          _liver_] See note, p. 133.

# 377:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 378:

          _doctor Doddipoll_] Is a ridiculous character in an
          old play called _The Wisdome of Doctor Dodypoll_,
          printed 1600; but the term is found long before that
          date: _doddipoll_ is dunderhead.

# 379:

          _questuary_] i.e. profitable.

# 380:

          _bawdies_] See the same miserable pun, vol. i. p. 245.

# 381:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 382:

          _Enter Maria above_] So the old ed.; and we must
          suppose that she is standing in a gallery: the first
          words of Gerardine’s speech on entering shew that this
          scene takes place _within_ the house: compare p. 159,
          where Glister appears “_above_,” _within the house_.

# 383:

          _Give_] Old ed. “Giues.”

# 384:

          _liberal_] i.e. licentious.

# 385:

          _Deeply_] Old ed. “Deadly.”

# 386:

          _the round_] Certain soldiers of inferior rank (only
          above the lancepesado), whose office was to _go round_
          and inspect the sentinels, watches, and advanced
          guard, were called _gentlemen of the round_: see
          Whalley’s note in Gifford’s ed. of B. Jonson’s
          _Works_, vol. i. p. 85.

# 387:

          _word_] i.e. watchword.

# 388:

          _Do_] Old ed. “Doth.”

# 389:

          _sun approaches_] Old ed. “sons aproache:” but I
          suspect that the whole line is corrupted, and that the
          epithet “blushing” belongs to “Aurora.”

# 390:

          _towards_] See note, p. 177.

# 391:

          _statute-caps_] i.e. citizens, who, according to a
          statute of Elizabeth in behalf of the trade of
          cappers, wore, on Sabbath days and holydays, caps of
          wool. See the notes of the commentators on "Well,
          better wits have worn plain _statute-caps_."—
          SHAKESPEARE’S _Love’s Labour’s Lost_, act V. sc. 2.

# 392:

          _pedlar’s French_] i.e. unintelligible jargon. It is,
          properly, the cant language of vagabonds.

# 393:

          _costards_] i.e. heads.

# 394:

          _cotten_] See note, p. 150.

# 395:

          _O, but_, &c.] Qy. ought this to be given to
          Gerardine?

# 396:

          _Poppin_] So some copies of the old ed., others
          “_Exigent_:” though there is certainly but _one_
          impression of this play: see p. 103. Middleton (who
          did not superintend the printing of it, see p. 107)
          had dismissed the name _Exigent_ for that of _Poppin_,
          or _vice versa_; and his uncorrected MS., where Dryfat
          was sometimes called by one name, sometimes by the
          other, was followed by the printer. This, however, is
          the only place in which the copies (at least those
          that I have seen) differ from each other with respect
          to these names; an alteration having been made here
          after part of the impression had been worked off. I
          have retained the name _Poppin_ throughout.

# 397:

          _attone them_] _Attone_ or _atone_ is—reconcile, set
          them _at one_.—Old ed. “_attone them_ put them
          together:” but see notes, pp. 134, 162.

# 398:

          _play Ambidexter_] So in Nash’s _Pierce Pennilesse_;
          “it is like inough he is _playing Ambidexter_ amongst
          them.” Sig. B, ed. 1595. The allusion is to Preston’s
          _Cambises King of Percia_, n. d. (written about the
          beginning of Elizabeth’s reign), in which the Vice is
          named _Ambidexter_. This “_lamentable tragedie mixed
          full of plesant mirth_” is reprinted in the first vol.
          of Hawkins’s _Origin of the English Drama_.

# 399:

          _Poppin_] Old ed. “Exigent:” see note, p. 194.

# 400:

          _cum nemini_, &c.]—“ea, quoniam nemini obtrudi potest,
          Itur ad me.” Ter. _And._ i. 5, 15.

# 401:

          _Byrlady_] See note, p. 66.

# 402:

          _Poppin_] Old ed. “Exigent:” see note, p. 194.

# 403:

          _cotations_] i.e. quotations—memoranda of what she had
          heard at the meetings of the Family.

# 404:

          _tagged point_] See note, vol. i. p. 244.

# 405:

          _bewray all_, &c.] The same play on words occurs in
          vol. i. p. 294, where see note.

# 406:

          _angel_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 407:

          _gilt’s_, &c.] _Gilt_ or _gelt_, i.e. gold, money.

# 408:

          _five-finger at maw_] “For my game [at maw] stood, me
          thought, upon my last two tricks, when I made sure of
          the set, and yet lost it, hauing the varlet and _the
          fiue finger_ to make two tricks.” Chapman’s _May Day_,
          1611, p. 76.—For some account of maw, see Singer’s
          _Researches into the Hist. of Playing Cards_, p. 258,
          sqq.

# 409:

          _gear_] See note, p. 155.

# 410:

          _Club._ _Silence!_] Old ed. has only the
          stage-direction, “_He cries_.”

# 411:

          _apparance_] See note, p. 119.

# 412:

          _narrow-ruffed_] Some copies of old ed. “_narrow_
          rusty,” others “_narrow_ ruste:” yet there is but one
          impression of the play: see p. 103. Compare what
          Gudgeon says of mistress Purge’s “ruffs,” p. 131.

# 413:

          _rout_] i.e. rabble.

# 414:

          _Byrlady_] See note, p. 66.

# 415:

          _edax rerum_] scil. _tempus._

# 416:

          _now strike_, &c.] See p. 186.

# 417:

          _cast about_] i.e. devise. Dryfat puns on the word
          _cast_, as meaning to vomit.

# 418:

          _bewray_] See note, p. 197.

# 419:

          _Kiss the book_] Is, perhaps, only a stage-direction.

# 420:

          _sir-reverence_] See note, p. 175.

# 421:

          _as if I knew you not_] Imitated from Falstaff’s “I
          knew ye, as well as he that made ye.” SHAKESPEARE’S
          _Henry IV. Part I._ act ii. sc. 4.

# 422:

          _Poppin_] Old ed. “Exigent:” see note, p. 194.

# 423:

          _suppositor doctor_] See note, p. 161.

# 424:

          _thereon_] Old ed. “therein.”

# 425:

          _Poppin_] Old ed. “Exigent:” see note, p.194.

# 426:

          _Dry._] Old ed. “_Club_.”

# 427:

          _Pis._] What place is indicated by this abbreviation,
          I cannot pretend to determine.

# 428:

          _doctor_] Old ed. "proctor"—but that part is assumed
          by Dryfat.

# 429:

          _grincomes_] See note, p. 121.

# 430:

          _Poppin_] Old ed. “Exigent:” see note, p. 194.

# 431:

          _colour_] See note, p. 184.

# 432:

          _blot in your tables_] An expression drawn from games
          played with the tables: “beware of _blotting_,” says
          the _Complete Gamester_, p. 155, ed. 1674.

# 433:

          _limb-lifter_] Old ed. “Timelifter:” but compare _A
          Handefull of Pleasant Delites_, &c., 1584, “a lustie
          _lim lifter_,” p. 18, reprint.

# 434:

          _runs at his wife’s ring_] See note, vol. i. p. 390.

# 435:

          _Poppin_] Old ed. “Exigent:” see note, p. 194.

# 436:

          _have_] Old ed. “hath.”

# 437:

          _enjoinment_] Old ed. “enioyntment.”

# 438:

          _Dry._ _The very_, &c.] Old ed.

          "DRY. { _The very same_: your _are welcome to our
             Club_
          CLUB. { _Lawe_."

# 439:

          _Epilogue_] Is, of course, spoken by Gerardine.

# 440:

          _touch_] i.e. touchstone.

# 441:

                _Presenter, or Prologue_, &c.] Except that I
                have inserted between brackets the names of the
                “gallants,” I have given this strange Induction
                as it stands in the old ed. The latter part of
                it, “Now, for the other,” &c., seems to be an
                address to the reader; though perhaps it was
                spoken by the Presenter.

# 442:

          _Frippery discovered_, &c.] In the old ed. the only
          stage-direction here is “_Enter a fellow_,” and the
          prefixes to the dialogue which follows are _Frip._,
          1., 2., 3., and 4.—Till the entrance of Primero, the
          scene in the old ed. is a mass of confusion.

# 443:

          _jealous_] i.e. suspiciously afraid: so afterwards in
          this play: “Ah, but I am _jealous_ you will not keep
          your countenance, i’faith.”

# 444:

          _casting-bottle_] i.e. bottle for casting, or
          sprinkling, liquid essences and perfumes, often
          mentioned by our early dramatists; its use was not
          confined to ladies.

# 445:

          _hose_] i.e. breeches.

# 446:

          _I’ll come to you presently_] These words, which in
          the old ed. form part of the preceding speech, are, I
          suppose, addressed to the second fellow.

# 447:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 448:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 449:

          _falls_] i.e. falling bands, which lay flat upon the
          dress from the neck.

# 450:

          _gentlewomen’s_] Old ed. “gentlewomans.”

# 451:

          _nobles_] See note, p. 17.

# 452:

          _do_] Old ed. “does.”

# 453:

          _I will_] Old ed. “ile:” and in next line but one,
          “about.”

# 454:

          _primero_] An old and favourite game at cards: see
          Singer’s _Researches into the Hist. of Playing Cards_,
          p. 244 sqq.

# 455:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 456:

          _call it_] Old ed. “calt.”

# 457:

          _I’d_] Old ed. “I had.”

# 458:

          _trug_] i.e. trull. The word is not very common: “nor
          (shall I speake plainely) please the _Trugge_ his
          mistresse, without he goe to the Apothecaries,” &c.
          GREENE’S _Quip for an Upstart Courtier_, sig D 3, ed.
          1620.

# 459:

          _gallant_] Old ed. “Gallants.”

# 460:

          _fall_] See note, p. 218.

# 461:

          _frippery_] This word has been rightly explained by
          Gifford and others as—a place where old clothes are
          exposed for sale: but here the profession of frippery
          seems to be meant; compare Chapman;

            "D’OL. Now your profession, I pray?
            FRIP. _Fripperie_, my lord, or as some tearme it,
               _Petty Brokery_."

                                MONSIEUR D’OLIVE, 1606, sig E 4.

# 462:

          _and you make you ready_] i.e. if you dress yourself:
          compare p. 57 and note.

# 463:

          _changed_] Old ed. “chande.”

# 464:
          PRI. _But, mass, sir_] Old ed. “Ar. _But_ maister.”

# 465:

          _prevent_] See note, p. 49.

# 466:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 467:

          _lins_] i.e. ceases.

# 468:

          _mark_[_s_]] A mark was 13_s._ 4_d._

# 469:

          _rize_] i.e. rose.

# 470:

          _Nor ceas’d_, &c.] All the latter part of this speech
          is prose in the old ed.: as to the arrangement of it,
          the reader must be aware that imperfect lines
          frequently occur in the blank verse of our early
          dramatists: see, for instance, the speeches of
          Katherine to her suitors in next scene.

# 471:

          _censur’d me_] i.e. held me in their opinion.

# 472:

          _not_] Old ed. “nor.”

# 473:

          _in the Knight’s ward_] See note, vol. i. p. 392.—The
          old ed. gives the passage thus: “_I am sure he is fast
          inough? and Andrew Lucifer’s Rapier and dagger, in the
          knights ward, with the embost_,” &c.

# 474:

          _hangers_] i.e. fringed and ornamented loops attached
          to the girdle, in which the weapons were suspended.

# 475:

          _than_] Old ed. “them.”

# 476:

          _your wrongs_] May be right: but qy. “you wrong.”

# 477:

          _perfection_] Old ed. “perfections.”

# 478:

          _commend_] Old ed. “command.”

# 479:

          _Vouchsafe_, &c.] Old ed. thus:

            “Vouchsafe vnequalld Virgin whereon I iustly kept,
            Accept this worthlesse fauor from your seruants
               arme, the hallowed beades,
            The true and perfect number of my sighs.”

# 480:

          _likes_] See note, p. 47.

# 481:

          _purchase_] See note, vol. i. p. 319.

# 482:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. here and in the next line but five, “I
          haue.”

# 483:

          _push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 484:

          _when_] See note, vol. i. p. 362.

# 485:

          _Savoy_] i.e. the Savoy: see Stowe’s _Survey_, b. i.
          p. 210, and b. iv. p. 106, ed. 1720.

# 486:

          _inward_] i.e. intimate.—The old ed. gives to Pursenet
          the words “gentleman; his parts deserve it.”

# 487:

          _Piping hot_, &c.] The first part of this speech
          relates to Fitsgrave, who has joined the “gallants”
          under the name of Bouser; the second part to Bungler.

# 488:

          _clip_] i.e. embrace.

# 489:

          _viols_] See note, p. 11.]

# 490:

          _Pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 491:

          _respectively_] i.e. respectfully: compare vol. i. p.
          425.

# 492:

          _You’re_] Old ed. “You are.”

# 493:

          _they’ll_] Old ed. “they will.”

# 494:

          _Exit_] Is not marked in old ed.: but, as far as I
          understand the scene, it seems necessary.

# 495:

          _queasy_] i.e. squeamish.

# 496:

          _I’m ... I’ve_] Old ed. “I am ... I have.”

# 497:

          _he_] I have not altered this stage-direction, as I am
          not sure who is meant by the word _he_. Primero (see
          p. 234) had desired the Boy to “be ready for the
          song.”

# 498:

          _no affliction_] Qy. “not a fiction.”

# 499:
          PRI. _My wits_, &c.] I suspect that this speech ought
          to be divided thus:

                    "PRI. ’Slife, he’s in a sick trance!
                    GOL. My wits must not stand idle:
                    A cheat or two," &c.

# 500:

          _and it_] i.e. if it. Old ed. “an’t.”

# 501:

          _and so_] Old ed. “_and_ has _so_.”

# 502:

          _never_] Old ed. “nere.”

# 503:

          _Pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 504:

          _Goldstone_] Old ed. “Bouser,” which is Fitsgrave’s
          assumed name,—the author, I suppose, having merely
          written G., which the printer took for B.

# 505:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 506:

          _You’ve_] Old ed. “You have.”

# 507:

          _miss it_] i.e. let it go.

# 508:

          _nobles_] See note, p. 17.

# 509:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 510:

          _were it_] Old ed. “wer’t.”

# 511:

          _you’ll_] Old ed. “you will.”

# 512:

          _respectively_] See note, p. 235.

# 513:

          _Mermaid_] A famous tavern in Cornhill, frequented by
          Shakespeare, Jonson, Beaumont, Fletcher, &c.

# 514:

          _Mitre_] Another celebrated tavern, in Bread Street,
          Cheapside: it was afterwards removed to Fleet Street.

# 515:

          _Faith_, &c.] This speech is given in old ed. to
          Goldstone; but it disagrees with what he has just
          said.

# 516:

          _push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 517:

          _Boy_, &c.] What I have here given to Pursenet is in
          the old ed. part of the speech of _All_.

# 518:

          _toward_] See note, p. 177.

# 519:

          _tire-men_] i.e. dressers belonging to the theatre,—as
          it seems from what follows.

# 520:

          _Look you ... out forty_] Given to Pursenet in old ed.

# 521:

          _come_] Old ed. “comes.”

# 522:

          _pullen_] i.e. poultry.

# 523:

          _nobles_] See note, p. 17.

# 524:

          _More censure_] i.e. a higher opinion.

# 525:

          _they’re_] Old ed. “they are.”

# 526:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 527:

          _What made you_] i.e. what business had you?

# 528:

          _you_] Old ed. “your.”

# 529:

          _’Tween_] Old ed. “Turne.”

# 530:

          _populous_] i.e. prevalent, common,—or, perhaps,
          abundant.

# 531:

          _With which thou ever_, &c.] After this line the old
          ed. has “_Exeunt_.

                            _Enter Fitsgraue._

            FITSG. My pocket pickt,” &c.;

          and after his conversation with the servant and _exit_
          (no new scene being marked),

            “_Taylb._ Oh the parting of vs twaine, 14“ᚬ_Enter
               Whore Gal._
          Hath causde me mickle paine,” &c.

          But the scene between Fitsgrave and the servant
          intervenes here so awkwardly, that I have ventured to
          make a transposition.

# 532:

          _mickle_] i.e. great.

# 533:

          _Enter Fitsgrave_, &c.] See note in preceding page.

# 534:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 535:

          _you belong to me_, &c.] Is the text corrupted here,
          or is something wanting?

# 536:

          _stoln_] Qy., for the sake of the rhyme, "lorn,"—i.e.
          lost.

# 537:

          _Scene III._, &c.] Concerning the transposition of the
          preceding scene, see note, p. 246.—In the old ed. the
          present scene follows the exit of Primero with Tailby
          (see p. 247) thus:

            “_Pri._ Come, you shall see how tis alterd now? I do
               not thinke
          but you’le like her.  _Exit._
            _Pri._ Where be your liueries?  _Enter all at once._
            1. They attend without.” &c.
          The commencement of act iii., which the old ed. does
          not mark, might have taken place here, had not the
          preposterous length of act iv. in that ed. obliged me
          to divide it into the iii. and iv. acts.

# 538:

          _the Mitre_] See note, p. 240.—The entertainment given
          by “the gallants” to Primero and his ladies is
          supposed to be just over.

# 539:

          _alchemy_] See note, vol. iv. p. 122.

# 540:

          _chatterer_] Old ed. “quarter her.”

# 541:

          _Pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 542:

          _slight_] i.e. contrivance, artifice.

# 543:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 544:

          _Exit Vintner_, &c.] We are of course to suppose that
          Goldstone, while talking with the vintner, contrives
          to “shift away the beakers by a slight,” and leave in
          their places the “alchemy knaves” which Fulk had
          brought to him: but as I do not understand how the
          trick was executed, I have not ventured to add any
          stage-directions.

# 545:

          _Fit._] Old ed. “_Gold._”

# 546:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 547:

          _angel_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 548:

          _rose-noble_] i.e. a gold coin (stamped with a rose)
          worth sixteen shillings.

# 549:

          _cracked in the ring_] “The gold coin of our ancestors
          was very thin, and therefore liable to crack. It
          still, however, continued passable until the crack
          extended beyond the _ring_, _i.e._ beyond the inmost
          round which circumscribed the inscription; when it
          became _uncurrent_, and might be legally refused.”
          GIFFORD—note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. vi. p. 76.

# 550:

          _pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 551:

          _Tai._] Old ed. “_Purs._”

# 552:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 553:

          _thine_] Old ed. “mine.”

# 554:

          _will be ever one_] Old ed. “_will be ever_ be _one_.”

# 555:

          _again_] i.e. against.

# 556:

          _Hist_] Old ed. “Pist.”

# 557:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 558:

          _Pur._ &c.] Old ed. “All.”

# 559:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 560:

          _again_] See note, p. 255.

# 561:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 562:

          _hatcht_] i.e. engraved.

# 563:

          _hangers_] See note, p. 227.

# 564:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 565:

          _snibbed_] i.e. snubbed—a form of the word which
          sometimes occurs.

# 566:

          _Haff_, &c.] So old ed.—the spelling being intended to
          express the broken utterance of the speaker.

# 567:

          _Fie_, &c.] The old ed. gives this speech, “_Fie_ ath
          _these_,” &c., without any prefix.

# 568:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 569:

          _come_] Old ed. “comes.”

# 570:

          _word_] i.e. motto.

# 571:

          _Gol._] Old ed. “_Purs._,” which the next speech of
          Pursenet shews to be wrong: but, perhaps, the prefix
          should be “Fulk.”

# 572:

          _Fit._] Old ed. “_Fulk._”

# 573:

          _disgest_] Frequently found in our old writers for
          _digest_.

# 574:

          _cross-biter_] i.e. cheater.

# 575:

          _royals ... as many with spurs_, &c.] i.e.
          spur-royals—gold coins (with a star on the reverse
          resembling the rowel of a spur) worth fifteen
          shillings.

# 576:

          _Sec. D. What’s_, &c.] Old ed. gives “Drawer, what’s
          to be done, sirs?” as part of Goldstone’s speech.

# 577:

          _near all_] i.e. touches all nearly—if, indeed, that
          be the right reading. Old ed. “meere _all_.”

# 578:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 579:

              _Pur. Faith_, ] Given in old ed., as one speech,
                 to Pursenet.
              _Gol. Nay_, &c.]

# 580:

          _yon_] i.e. yonder.

# 581:

          _Here, sir_] Not knowing how this second piece of
          knavery is managed (see note, p. 251), I have not
          attempted to supply any stage-directions. Goldstone
          seems to have removed the goblet from the place where
          it “hung” (see p. 261), and to have hid it somewhere,
          till all except himself and Fulk had left the room.

# 582:

          _Act III._] Old ed. “Actus 4:” see note, p. 248.

# 583:

          _be ready_] i.e. dress himself: compare p. 224 and
          note.

# 584:

          _toward_] See note, p. 177.

# 585:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 586:

          _Combe Park_] Lands so called in the parish of
          Kingston upon Thames: see Manning and Bray’s _Hist.
          of Surrey_, vol. i. p. 401.—In _The Black Book_
          (reprinted in the last vol. of Middleton’s _Works_),
          Lucifer makes “a high thief on horseback” the
          “keeper of Combe Park.”

# 587:

          _purchase_] See note, vol. i. p. 319.

# 588:

          _Scene II._] Here in the old ed. no new scene is
          marked: after Pursenet had spoken the words “there
          will I meet him,” and thrown a scarf over his face
          (see what follows), the audience were to suppose that
          the stage represented Combe Park: vide note, p. 147.

# 589:

          _ne’er_] Old ed. “never.”

# 590:

          _injury_] So in _The Wisdome of Doctor Dodypoll_,
          1600;

              “Ashamed that you should _iniurie_ your estate
              To kneele to me.”
                                                Sig. H 2.

# 591:

          _marks_] See note, p. 226.

# 592:

          _any_] Has a word, which followed this, dropt out?

# 593:

          _covetous_] Old ed. “courteous.”

# 594:

          _purchase_] See note, vol. i. p. 319.

# 595:

          _spur-royals_] See note, p. 260.

# 596:

          _fire-drakes_] i.e. a sort of fire-works.

# 597:

          _thy_] Qy. “my.”

# 598:

          _pasture_] Qy. “pastime.”

# 599:

          _her_] Old ed. “him.”

# 600:

          _hist_] Old ed. “pist.”

# 601:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 602:

          _pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 603:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 604:

          _know_] Old ed. “knowes.”

# 605:

          _standing_] A word that followed this seems to have
          dropt out.

# 606:

          _again_] See note, p. 255.

# 607:

          _I’m_] Old ed., “I am.”

# 608:

          _Enter Fitsgrave and Gentleman_] Old ed. “_Enter two
          Gentlemen_:” but one of them is certainly Fitsgrave,
          who has put into the hands of his companion the letter
          which Pursenet had dropt: see the last line of sc. ii.
          of this act. Besides, the first speaker here declares
          that he has found “_three_ of the gallants;” and
          Fitsgrave, in act iv. sc. 5, says,

              "The broker-gallant and the cheating-gallant,
              _Now I have found ’em all_."

# 609:

          _shame_] Qy. “charm.”

# 610:

          _faints_] Old ed. “faires.”

# 611:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 612:

          _Yea, at your book so hard_] Perhaps it is hardly
          worth noticing, that, in the _Third Part of Henry
          VI._, act v. sc. 6, Gloster says to Henry,

            “Good day, my lord: _what, at your book so hard_?”

# 613:

          _Ex for ex_] Can this expression mean “_ecce_, for
          example?”

# 614:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 615:

          _are_] Old ed. “were.”

# 616:

          _Mitre-night_] See note, p. 248.—Had the giving of
          suppers to these ladies at the Mitre grown now to a
          custom?

# 617:

          _struggling_] Old ed. “he thumps.”

# 618:

          _lined_] May be right,—but qy. “limed.”

# 619:

          _a chrisom_] i.e. an infant,—one who dies within the
          month of its birth, and is buried in the _chrisome_, a
          white cloth, an emblem of Christian innocency, which
          was thrown over it at baptism, and which it was to
          wear till the mother came to be purified, when the
          cloth was returned to the church.

          Before the Reformation, in the old baptismal office,
          the _chrisom_ cloth was put on the child’s head, to
          prevent, according to Ducange _in Chrismate_, the holy
          oil (χρισμα) from running off.

          Compare Shakespeare’s _Henry V._ act ii. sc. 3, where
          dame Quickly says of Falstaff, "’a made a finer end,
          and _went away an it had been any christom child_."

# 620:

          _watchet_] i.e. light blue.

# 621:

          _Enter a Servant_, &c.] The old ed. (in which the
          commencement of act iv. is marked much earlier, see
          note, p. 263) has, “_In the midst of the musick enter
          one bringing in_,” &c.

# 622:

          _Wigmore’s galliard_] Is frequently mentioned by our
          early writers: see a galliard minutely described,
          note, vol. i. p. 65.

# 623:

          _the chamber_] After these words the stage-direction
          in the old ed. is, “_The musicke plaies on a while,
          then enter Tailbee his man after trussing him_.”

# 624:

          _trussing him_] i.e. tying his points: see note, vol.
          i. p. 367.

# 625:

          _now down_] Old ed. “nowne.”

# 626:

          _that’s_] Old ed. “whats.”

# 627:

          _All-holland-tide_] i.e. All-hallows-tide: see note,
          p. 165.

# 628:

          _Take_] Old ed. “Takes.”

# 629:

          _disgested_] See note, p. 259.

# 630:

          _lead_] Old ed. “lend.”

# 631:

          _at her house_] Old ed. “at home, _at her house_;” see
          notes 241 and 244, p. 134.

# 632:

          _Gol._] Old ed. “_Bung_.”

# 633:

          _fig-frails_] i.e. fig-baskets.

# 634:

          _steaks_] Compare vol. i. p. 336, where, as the
          present passage shews, the reading “_steaks_ of
          velvet” is right.

# 635:

          _Pax_] See note, p. 24.

# 636:

          _hangers_] See note, p. 227.

# 637:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 638:

          _filed_] i.e. polished.

# 639:

          _men’s_] Qy. "mends"—i.e. helps.

# 640:

          _The Middle Aisle_, &c.] See note, vol. i. p. 418.

# 641:

          _ram’s head_] As a crest, I suppose.

# 642:

          _I’d know_] Old ed. “I knew.”

# 643:

          _Do you walk, sir_?] Is in the old ed. the conclusion
          of Pursenet’s speech, whose exit with the Boy is not
          marked. As we subsequently learn (see pp. 297, 298)
          that the sharper had succeeded in his design on
          Pyamont’s gold, by falling into a pretended swoon, I
          cannot help suspecting that a portion of this scene
          has dropt out, and that the incident of the swoon took
          place here on the stage, after Pursenet had tried all
          other means of surprising Pyamont’s caution.

# 644:

          _guess_] i.e. guests: see note, vol. i. p. 326.

# 645:

          _vild_] See note, vol. i. p. 94.

# 646:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 647:

          _a’ life_] See note, vol. i. p. 272.

# 648:

          _jealous_] See note, p. 216.

# 649:

          _Why, ye shall see a pretty story of a humour_] These
          words are given to Bungler in the old ed.

# 650:

          _stay_] Old ed. “stray.”

# 651:

          _maple-faced_] Whether this epithet is to be explained
          rough-faced, or brown-faced, or broad-faced, seems
          doubtful: see Gifford’s note on B. Jonson’s _Works_,
          vol. vi. p. 156.

# 652:

          _goldsmith_] When this drama was written, and indeed
          long after, goldsmiths acted as bankers:

           “_Enter Trainsted with a purse of gold in his hand._
          TRAINST. I have been with my goldsmith, and am well
          furnished to start hence.” Sir E. Howard’s _Man of
          Newmarket_, 1678, act i. sc. i.

# 653:

          _how often I swooned_] See note, p. 291.

# 654:

          _a good caudle_, &c.] Here again (see note, p. 151),
          Middleton seems to consider _caudle_ and a _cullis_ as
          the same thing. According to ancient receipts, fine
          gold and orient pearl are among the ingredients of the
          latter.

# 655:

          _are_] Old ed. “is.”

# 656:

          _I’d_] Old ed. “I would.”

# 657:

          _conveyance_] i.e. sleight of hand,—a delicate term
          for stealing.

# 658:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 659:

          _carkanet_] i.e. a collar of jewels, a necklace.

# 660:

          _laid_] See note, p. 11.

# 661:

          _goldsmith_] Old ed. “goldsmits.”

# 662:

          _leese_] i.e. lose—(lose sight of Goldstone, I
          presume).

# 663:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 664:

          _spur-royals_] See note, p. 260.

# 665:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 666:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 667:

          _Let go, ’tis_] Old ed. “lets _go_ this.”

# 668:

          _I’m glad in my soul, sir_] In the old ed. this speech
          is followed by a word printed in italics,—"_Gnawes_,"—
          which I presume is a stage-direction.

# 669:

          _spur-royals_] See note, p. 260.

# 670:

          _look, a’ ’s way_] Old ed. “lookt asway.”

# 671:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 672:

          _Admirable_] Old ed. “Admirall.”

# 673:

          _likes_] See note, p. 47.

# 674:

          _stag’d_, &c.] Old ed. “_sta’gde? why what lacks
          Bowser, are you too well, too safe, an absolute
          scholler._”

# 675:

          _We shall thrive_] An imperfect couplet: see notes, p.
          7 of this vol., p. 424 of vol. i.

# 676:

          _Pur._ _Little master Bouser_, &c.] Old ed. “_All._
          _Little maister Bowser, sweete maister Bowser welcome
          ifaith._”

# 677:

          _properties_] i.e. necessaries for the scene: in
          strict theatrical language, however, the term is
          applied to things, not to persons.

# 678:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 679:

          _A Chamber_] The commencement of the scene would
          lead us to suppose that the place of action is
          Primero’s house: but that Fitsgrave’s friends should
          conceal themselves in a gallery there, to watch the
          proceedings of “the gallants,” is surely somewhat
          absurd.

# 680:

          _twilight_, _twitter-lights_] Are, I believe,
          synonyms; and perhaps one of them ought to be
          struck out of the text. The latter is a word of
          rare occurrence; but we find it in our author’s
          _More Dissemblers besides Women_, “Come not till
          _twitter-light_,” act iii. sc. 1; and in the old
          play called _Wily Beguilde_, “What mak’st thou
          heere this _twatter light_?” Sig. E 3, ed. 1623.

# 681:

          _You have a privilege from your hat_, &c.] An allusion
          to some regulation about dress, which I cannot
          explain: the reader may turn to Strutt’s _Dress and
          Habits_, &c., vol. ii. p. 316.

# 682:

          _bean-flour bags_] Compare Eugenia’s speech in _The
          Old Law_, vol. i. p. 38.

# 683:

          _others_] Old ed. “us.”

# 684:

          _Third C._] Is perhaps the “Novice.”

# 685:

          _When that good news_, &c.] Is given to “3.” in old
          ed.

# 686:

          _Goldstone_, &c.] So the lines are divided in the old
          ed.: the measure is lost in the corruption of the
          text.

# 687:

          _So will I_] Is given to “3.” in old ed.; but the
          Third Court. had “set her affections” on Tailby.

# 688:

          _Here’s my_, &c.] Is given to “4.” in old ed.

# 689:

          _Bun._] Old ed. "3."—but Bungler, as we find, is one
          of the party.

# 690:

          _First G._ _What’s this?_ _Sec. G._ _Fooh_, &c.] One
          speech, given to “1.” in old ed.

# 691:

          _word_] See note, p. 258.

# 692:

          _high-men_] A cant term for false dice loaded so as
          always to produce high throws.

# 693:

          _Bun._] Old ed. “3:” see note in the preceding page.

# 694:

          _unvalued_] i.e. invaluable.

# 695:

          _Pythagorical rascal_] Compare p. 85 and note.

# 696:

          _This is my crown_, &c.] An imperfect couplet: see
          notes, p. 7 of this vol., p. 424 of vol. i.

# 697:

          _be contained_] i.e. restrain yourselves—be not so
          impatient.

# 698:

          _First the_, &c.] Given as part of Pursenet’s speech
          in old ed.

# 699:

          _Right, sir_] Given to Fitsgrave in old ed.

# 700:

          _unvalued_] See note, p. 314.

# 701:

          _The Welsh leiger_] Compare p. 88 and note. _Leiger_
          is a resident or ambassador at a foreign court.

# 702:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 703:

          _Fit._] Old ed. “_Bungl._”

# 704:

          _Fit._] Old ed. “_Purs._”

# 705:

          _Pur._] Old ed. “_Boy_.”

# 706:

          _Proceed_] Is part of the Boy’s speech in old ed.

# 707:

          _Boy_] Old ed. “_Fits._”

# 708:

          _Boy_] Old ed. “_Fits._”

# 709:

          _corporis_] Old ed. “corpus.”

# 710:

          _Pur._] Qy. “_Pri._”

# 711:

          _shrieve_] i.e. sheriff: old ed. “Sheerse.”

# 712:

          _charms_] Old ed. “swarmes.”

# 713:

          _bandora_] A musical instrument resembling a guitar:
          see Sir J. Hawkins’ _Hist. of Music_, vol. iii. p.
          345.

# 714:

          _Enter the Masque_, &c.] Here, and a little after, I
          have given the stage-direction as it stands in the old
          ed., with some additions between brackets.

# 715:

          _tell me_] i.e. acknowledge—if there be no corruption
          of the text.

# 716:

          _you’re_] Old ed. “you are.”

# 717:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 718:

          _under covert-baron_] See note, vol. i. p. 370.

# 719:

          _Fit._] This prefix has dropt out in old ed.

# 720:

          _Whom_] Old ed. “To _whom_.”

# 721:

                Prefixed to the ed. of 1640.

# 722:

                _twenty years_] A mistake: see p. 327.

# 723:

                _J. S._] For whom the ed. of 1640 is printed.

# 724:

          _I was as well given_, &c.] "Imitated from
          Shakespeare’s _First Part of K. Henry IV._ act iii.
          sc. 3, where Falstaff says, ‘I was as virtuously given
          as a gentleman need to be; virtuous enough: swore
          little; diced not above seven times a-week; went to a
          bawdy-house not above once in a quarter—of an hour;
          paid money that I borrowed, three or four times; lived
          well, and in good compass: and now I live out of all
          order, out of all compass.’" REED.

# 725:

          _the flag’s down_] “On the tops of our ancient
          theatres were flags, which we may suppose to have been
          taken down during the season of Lent, when plays were
          not suffered to be represented.” STEEVENS.

# 726:

          _no knight since one thousand six hundred_] “Alluding
          to the number of necessitous people who were created
          knights by king James after his accession.” REED.

# 727:

          _the glory of his complement_] “i.e. the number of his
          servants. We still say of a ship full manned, that she
          has her full _complement_.” STEEVENS.

# 728:

          _blue coats_] See note, p. 26.

# 729:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 730:

          _fathoms_] See note, vol. i. p. 415.

# 731:

          _first_] Dodsley and his editors read “_first_ rate.”

# 732:

          _wittol_] i.e. tame cuckold.

# 733:

          _to which himself gives aim_] i.e. which himself
          directs: see Gifford’s note on Massinger’s _Works_,
          vol. ii. p. 28, ed. 1813, where this passage is cited,
          and where the difference between the expressions _cry
          aim_ and _give aim_, both taken from archery, is
          accurately shewn: “he who _gave aim_ was stationed
          near the butts, and pointed out, after every
          discharge, how wide or how short the arrow fell of the
          mark.”

# 734:

          _shirt_] Old eds. “skirt.”

# 735:

          _common place_] A pun, I presume,—common-pleas.

# 736:

          _slight_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 737:

          _throw_] Old eds. “throwes.”

# 738:

          _opinion_] “i.e. reputation.” REED.

# 739:

          _recover’d_] Qy. “discover’d:” compare the third line
          of Harebrain’s next speech.

# 740:

          _There’s_] Old ed. “There is.”

# 741:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 742:

          _There’s_] Old ed. “there is.”

# 743:

          _the leather-winged bat_] From Spenser’s _Faerie
          Queene_, b. ii. c. xii. st. 36.

                "_The lether-winged batt_, dayes’ enimy."

# 744:

          _Hero and Leander_, _Venus and Adonis_] The two
          well-known poems of Marlowe and Shakespeare.

# 745:

          _the Resolution_] A once-celebrated (and excellent)
          work by Parsons the Jesuit, of which there are several
          editions. The title of the ed. now before me is, _A
          Book of Christian exercise apperteining to Resolution,
          that is, shewing how that wee shoulde resolue our
          selues to become Christians indeed. By R. P._ &c.
          1585. 12mo. _Second Part_, 1591. 12mo. The 9th chapter
          of Part I. Book 1. of the former portion treats of
          hell-punishments.

# 746:

          _I will_] Old eds. “Ile.”

# 747:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 748:

          _Family_] i.e. the Family of Love: see p. 103.

# 749:

          _She’s round with her, i’faith_] “i.e. she speaks
          plainly, in earnest to her.” STEEVENS.

# 750:

          _they’re_] Old ed. “they are.”

# 751:

          _slights_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 752:

          _coted_] i.e. quoted.

# 756:

          _Fondly_] i.e. foolishly.

# 753:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 754:

          _th’ Master’s side_] See note, vol. i. p. 392.

# 755:

          _to the third pile_] An allusion to the finest kind of
          velvet, called _three-pile_. “It seems to have been
          thought,” says Nares, quoting the present passage,
          “that there was a three-fold accumulation of the outer
          substance, or pile.” _Gloss._

# 757:

          _Pollcut_] So ed. 1640: ed. 1608, “Pelcut.”

# 758:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 759:

          _pair of organs_] i.e. the old expression for _an
          organ_.

# 760:

          _Pooh!_ Laughs] Old eds. “Laughs, puh.”

# 761:

          _call in my chief gentleman i’ th’ chain of gold_]
          “Stewards of noblemen and gentlemen of property used
          formerly to wear a gold chain.” REED.

# 762:

          _bastard_] i.e. a sweet Spanish wine: there were two
          sorts, white and brown.

# 763:

          _lord’s_] Old eds. “loue’s.”

# 764:

          _blue coats_] See note, p. 26.

# 765:

          _house_] Old eds. “houses.”

# 766:

          _pair_] See note, p. 346.

# 767:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 768:

          _consort_] i.e. company of musicians.

# 769:

          _A song_, &c.] During which, the audience were to
          suppose that Sir Bounteous was feasting his guests.

# 770:

          _Mawworm, Hoboy, and others_] Old eds. “_and his
          consorts_ [i.e. companions] _toward his lodging_.” I
          originally marked this scene “_a bed-chamber_;” but
          Sir Bounteous seems to accompany Follywit only to the
          door of his sleeping apartment.

# 771:

          _for_] i.e. for fear of.

# 772:

          _champion_] See note, p. 73.

# 773:

          _champers_] i.e., perhaps, horses (bridle-_champers_).
          Nares’s conjecture (in _Gloss._), that “_champers_” in
          this passage means _eaters_, seems very absurd.

# 774:

          _gilt_] Compare p. 197, where see note.

# 775:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 776:

          _dag’s end_] “i.e. at a distance, as by a _sword_ or
          _pistol_ advanced against me. _Dag_ is an ancient
          word, signifying either the one or the other.”
          STEEVENS. Most commonly it means _pistol_; see vol. i.
          p. 249.

# 777:

          _blacks_] “The common term formerly for mourning.”
          REED.

# 778:

          _a noble_] See note, 17.

# 779:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 780:

          _chief gentleman i’ th’ chain of gold_] See note, p.
          347.

# 781:

          _Exeunt_] Is not marked in the old eds., which, after
          Hoboy’s speech, have a stage-direction, “_Enter with
          Sir Bounteous in his night-gowne_.”

# 782:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 783:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 784:

          _a knight of Windsor_] “i.e. one of the poor knights
          of Windsor.” REED.

# 785:

          _purchase_] See note, vol. i. p. 319.

# 786:

          _lie_] Old eds. “lies.”

# 787:

          _take me with you, lady_] See note, p. 22.

# 788:

          _sect_] See note, p. 134.

# 789:

          _let gold_, &c.] See note, p. 298.

# 790:

          _Footman_] That is, one of Follywit’s companions in
          disguise: see p. 345.

# 791:

          _risse_] i.e. risen.

# 792:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 793:

          _commodity_] i.e. advantage, profit.

# 794:

          _Enter_, &c.] The only stage-direction in old eds. is
          “_Curtens drawn_.” See note, vol. i. p. 264.

# 795:

          _spur-royals_] See note, p. 260.

# 796:

          _guess_] i.e. guests: see note, vol. i. p. 326.

# 797:

          _Exit_] After Mawworm’s speech in ed. 1640 is the
          following stage-direction, “_A Song, sung by the
          musitians, and after the Song, a Country dance, by the
          Actors in their Vizards to a new footing_.”

# 798:

          _swag_] i.e. sink down,—in the balance.

# 799:

          _And so deflowers her that was ne’er deflower’d_] The
          same play upon words we find in _Romeo and Juliet_, A.
          4. S. 5.

                            ——“See, there she lies,
                _Flower_ as she was, _deflowered_ by him.
                Death is my son-in-law,” &c.      REED.

# 800:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 801:

          _vild_] i.e. vile: see note, vol. i. p. 94.

# 802:

          _luxury_] i.e. lewdness.

# 803:

          _where_] i.e. whereas.

# 804:

          _The Courtesan_, &c.] Old eds. “_The Curtizan on a
          bed, for her counterfeit fitt._”

# 805:

          _foot-cloth_] See note, vol. i. p. 396. “It is
          observed by Mr. Steevens, that anciently _the
          housings_ of a horse, and sometimes a horse himself,
          were denominated _a foot-cloth_.” REED.

# 806:

          _spiny_] i.e. thin, slender: see note, vol. i. p. 174.

# 807:

          _refocillation_] “i.e. restoration of strength by
          refreshment.” STEEVENS.

# 808:

          _Ah, hah_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “Ah.”

# 809:

          _that same oil of mace is a great comfort to both the
          counters_] See note, vol. i. p. 392. “A pun, alluding
          to the maces which were carried by the serjeants or
          varlets when they arrested people.” REED.

# 810:

          _angel_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 811:

          _purchase_] See note, vol. i. p. 319.

# 812:

          _in_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “of.”

# 813:

          _band_] Ed. 1640, “hand.”

# 814:

          _scab_] So ed. 1640. Not in first ed.

# 815:

          _officers_] Ed. 1640, “_officers_ and Projectors.”

# 816:

          _I’d_] Old eds. “I would.”

# 817:

          _e’er_] Old eds. “euer.”

# 818:

          _minute_] So 1640. Ed. 1608, “munit.”

# 819:

          _have_] Old eds. “hath.”

# 820:

          _snobbing_] i.e. violent sobbing. Todd, in his ed. of
          Johns. _Dict._, gives “To _Snub_, to sob with
          convulsion.”

# 821:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 822:

          _cullis_] See notes, pp. 151, 298.

# 823:

          _A Room_] In the house of one of Follywit’s friends,
          as we learn during the scene.

# 824:

          _muss_] “i.e. scramble.” REED.

# 825:

          _rose-nobles_] See note, p. 253.

# 826:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 827:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I haue.”

# 828:

          _For his blanch’d harlot_] “i.e. his harlot, whose
          skin is _made white_ by the use of cosmetics.”
          STEEVENS.

# 829:

          _gentleman_, &c.] See note, p. 347.

# 830:

          _rounded_] i.e. whispered.

# 831:

          _The rest_] Old eds. “_All._”

# 832:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I haue.”

# 833:

          _chinclout_] i.e. a sort of muffler, which covered the
          lower part of the face: see Douce’s _Illust. of
          Shakespeare_, vol. ii. p. 75.

# 834:

          _kind_] i.e. nature.

# 835:

          _making ready_] i.e. dressing: see note, p. 224.

# 836:

          _half moons_] "The edition of 1640 has '_periwigs_,'
          as if it was not then understood why they were called
          _half moons_." COLLIER.

# 837:

          _Cue_] “i.e. Kew.” REED.

# 838:

          _a flag_] See note, p. 332.

# 839:

          _bony scribes_] Ed. 1640, “_bony scribes_ and bony
          rags.”

# 840:

          _Brothel_] Old eds. "Once-Ill"—which was, no doubt,
          the name originally given by Middleton to this
          character, and which, through an oversight, had
          remained unaltered in some parts of the MS. used for
          the press.

# 841:

          _ready_] i.e. dressed: see note, p. 224.

# 842:

          _much like your German clock_] An allusion to the
          cumbrous and complicated machinery of our first
          clocks, which came from Germany: see Gifford’s note,
          B. Jonson’s _Works_, iii. 432.

# 843:

          _Enter Succubus in the shape of Mis. Harebrain_] Old
          eds. have “_Enter the Diuell in her shape_,” but
          prefix _Succubus_ to his speeches. Concerning the evil
          spirits called _Succubæ_,

                                ————"that are said
              To put on feminine feature....
                .  \.   .   .   .   .   .
              To draw men headlong with them to perdition,"

          see that very curious work by Heywood, _The Hierarchie
          of the Blessed Angels_, 1635, pp. 500, 542.

# 844:

          _Shield me_, &c.] “See _Hamlet_. [‘Angels and
          ministers of grace defend us.’ Act i. sc. 4.]”
          STEEVENS.

# 845:

          _tic’d_] i.e. enticed.—Old eds.

           “_Was I_ entis’st _for this? to be soone reiected_.”

# 846:

          _her_] i.e. of the hour—which I notice, because in the
          margin of an old copy now before me, some reader has
          conjectured “our.”

# 847:

          _fadom_] i.e. fathom—so written for the sake of the
          rhyme.

# 848:

          _Seiz’d_] "Both the quartos read _seard_; and again,
          _seare_ [first ed. ‘_ceare_’] in the next line. The
          alteration by Mr. Dodsley." REED. Compare p. 178 and
          note.

# 849:

          _Harebrain_] Old eds. here, and the next speech,
          “Hargraue,” a name which Middleton had once given to
          this lady, and which he had neglected to alter in some
          parts of the MS. used by the printer: see also note,
          p. 404.

# 850:

          _bums_] See note, vol. i. p. 432.

# 851:

          _a linen cloth about her jaw_] i.e. the chinclout: see
          p. 381 and note.

# 852:

          _It was suspected much in Monsieur’s days_] “By
          _Monsieur’s days_, I apprehend, the author means the
          time when the duke of Anjou resided in England. That
          prince, brother to Charles the Ninth, king of France,
          on the encouragement he had received from Queen
          Elizabeth, visited the English court in the year 1581,
          and expected to have been united to her majesty in
          marriage. The queen, however, after many affected
          delays, broke off the treaty; and the duke was obliged
          to return to his own country, with the disgrace of a
          direct refusal. _Monsieur’s days_ are mentioned again
          in _The Blacke Booke_, 1604, sign. C. ‘—let mercers
          then have conscionable thumbs when they measure out
          that smooth glittering devil, sattin, and that old
          reveller, velvet, in the _days of Monsieur_, both
          which have devoured many an honest field of wheat and
          barley.’” REED. The piece just cited is by Middleton,
          and will be found in the last vol. of the present
          work. So too in Marmyon’s _Fine Companion_, 1633, “Two
          or three dances, as old as _Mounsier_.” Sig. G 2.

# 853:

          _queasy_] i.e. squeamish.

# 854:

          _know_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “knew.”

# 855:

          _cullis_] See notes, pp. 151, 298.

# 856:

          _chain_] See note , p. 381.

# 857:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 858:

          _Pusha_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 859:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I haue.”

# 860:

          _Onyx cum prole, silexque_] “From _Propria quæ
          maribus_.” STEEVENS.

# 861:

          _pudding_] i.e. tobacco made up in a particular form.

# 862:

          _vild_] Altered in the eds. of Dodsley’s Old Plays to
          the modern spelling “vile,” which destroys the (very
          poor) play on words.

# 863:

          _waft_] i.e. flavour.

# 864:

          _Knocking within_] Old eds. “Master Penitent Once-Ill
          _knocking within_:” see note, p. 384.

# 865:

          _Harebrain_] Here, and throughout the scene, she and
          her husband are called “Hargraue” in the old eds.: see
          notes, pp. 388, 404.

# 866:

          _likes me_] “i.e. pleases me.” REED.

# 867:

          _assum’d thee formally_] “i.e. assumed thy form.”
          REED.

# 868:

          _periwig_] When this play was written, _periwigs_ were
          much worn by ladies.

# 869:

          _clips_] “i.e. embraces.” REED.

# 870:

          _his_] Old eds. “her.”

# 871:

          _e’er_] Old eds. “euer.”

# 872:

          _e’er I’ve_] Old eds. “euer I haue.”

# 873:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 874:

          _by your favour, ladies_] "The players of James the
          First’s time seem to have been as censurable for
          addressing the audience as any of their successors
          since. This speech is evidently not intended for the
          bawd, who now enters _alone_. In the same manner sir
          Bounteous speaks to the auditors, when he says, ‘An
          old man’s venery is very chargeable, my masters;
          there’s much cookery belongs to’t.’ [p. 390.]" REED.

# 875:

          _peevish_] i.e. foolish.

# 876:

          _have_] Old eds. “has.”

# 877:

          _made women_] i.e. women whose fortunes are made.

# 878:

          _hole_] i.e. hide.

# 879:

          _She’ll_] Old eds. “she will.”

# 880:

          _restraint upon_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “_restraint_
          on’t _upon_.”

# 881:

          _maid_] Old eds. “man.”

# 882:

          _fear thee_] “i.e. affright thee.” REED.

# 883:

          _resolv’d_] See note, p. 39.

# 884:

          _no curious wooer_] For “_curious_” Dodsley chose to
          substitute “_furious!_” and Reed remarks that
          "_curious_ is probably the genuine reading; it may
          mean _inquisitive, prying!_"—_No curious wooer_ is, no
          wooer that uses nice, elegant, elaborate phrase.

# 885:

          _trow_] See note, p. 26.

# 886:

          _take her e’en_] Old eds. “_eene take her_.”

# 887:

          _hundred_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “_hundred pound_.”

# 888:

          _e’er_] Old eds. “euer.”

# 889:

          _All Hollantide_] See note, p. 165.

# 890:

          _clip_] See note, p. 397.

# 891:

          _Enter Sir Bounteous_, &c.] Old eds. “_Enter_ busilie
          _Sir Bounteous Progresse_ for the feast.”

# 892:

          _blue coats_] See note, p. 26.

# 893:

          _Harebrain_] Here, and in the next speech of sir
          Bounteous, also in all the prefixes to Harebrain’s
          speeches in the following scene, the old eds. have
          “Shortrod;” one of the names which Middleton gave to
          the character, before he finally changed it to
          _Harebrain_: see note, p. 388.

# 894:

          _share_] See Mr. Collier’s remarks “on the payment of
          actors,” _Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poetry_, vol. iii. p.
          427: there were whole sharers, three-quarter sharers,
          half sharers, &c.

# 895:

          _bastard_] See note, p. 347.

# 896:

          _your_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “you.”

# 897:

          _Mitre_] See note, p. 240.—In justice to Reed (see
          note in the last ed. of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_), I must
          observe, that _my_ copy of the first ed. has “Niter.”

# 898:

          _Buz_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “Buzy.”

# 899:

          _Pox_] Old eds. “post.”

# 900:

          _pilfer_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “Gilfer.”

# 901:

          _thee_] So ed. 1640. First ed. "him."

# 902:

          _her_] So ed. 1640. First ed. "him."

# 903:

          _Whew, whew_] So ed. 1640. First ed. "When, when,"
          which, after all, may be right, as an exclamation of
          impatience for the performance of the play: see notes,
          vol. i. pp. 289, 361.

# 904:
          FOL. _Excellent well, sir_] So ed. 1640. Not in first
          ed.

# 905:

          _and ne’er_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “and speake nere”.

# 906:

          _shares_] See note, p. 406.

# 907:

          _Har._] Old eds. in the prefixes to his speeches
          throughout this scene, “Shortrod:” see note, p. 404.

# 908:

          _ycleped_] i.e. called.

# 909:

          _like a bold Beacham_] _As bold as Beauchamp_ is a
          proverbial expression, said to have originated in
          the valour of Thomas, first earl of Warwick of that
          name, “who (says Ray, after Fuller), in the year
          1346, with one squire and six archers, fought in
          hostile manner with an hundred armed men, at Hogges
          in Normandy, and overthrew them, slaying sixty
          Normans, and giving the whole fleet means to land.”
          _Proverbs_, p. 219, ed. 1742.—Follywit, however,
          seems to allude to one of the characters in a
          celebrated drama, produced before 1600, called _The
          bold Beauchamps_, which is frequently mentioned by
          our early writers: it no longer exists. The author
          of the false _Second Part of Hudibras_, 1663, canto
          1. (in some lines quoted by Collier, _Hist. of Engl.
          Dram. Poetry_, vol. iii. p. 425), attributes it to
          Heywood; but his authority is of little weight.

# 910:

          _ah, hah_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “_ah_.”

# 911:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 912:

          _send for him to a supper_] “The custom for the
          prostitutes at a theatre afterwards to sup with the
          players, though not to invite them home to supper, is
          alluded to in Field’s _Amends for Ladies_, 1639 [act
          iii. sc. 4—first ed. in 1618]: a Drawer says, ‘I have
          been at Bess Turnup’s, and she swears all the
          gentlewomen went to see a play at the Fortune, and are
          not come in yet; and she believes they _sup with the
          players_.’” COLLIER.

# 913:

          _two-penny room_] Or two-penny gallery: see Collier’s
          _Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poetry_, vol. iii. p. 343.

# 914:

          _full of gentlemen_] That it was a common practice for
          youths of fashion to sit on stools upon the stage
          during the performance, is known from many passages of
          our old literature.

# 915:

          _trow_] See note, p.26.

# 916:

          _A_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “Ha.”

# 917:

          _vild_] See note, p. 393.

# 918:

          _ditch_] i.e. worthless, vile. Ed. 1640 has “_an_
          excellent _example for all_ dizzy _constables_.”

# 919:

          _lets you_] “i.e. hinders you.” REED.

# 920:

          _Gum._] So ed. 1640. First ed. “Nub.”

# 921:

          _aches_] A dissyllable: see notes, vol. i. pp. 28, 45.

# 922:

          _I’m ... I’m_] Old eds. “I am ... I am.” This line
          makes a couplet with what follows.

# 923:

          _Faith, they were some counterfeit rogues ... they
          said they’d play_ The Slip] “We have here a play
          upon words very common in our ancient writers, and
          which will be totally unintelligible, unless it is
          remembered that _a slip_ was formerly the name of a
          piece of _counterfeit_ money.... Robert Greene’s
          _Thieves falling out, True Men come by their own_:
          ‘And therefore he went and got him certain _slips_,
          which are _counterfeit_ pieces of money, being
          brass, and covered over with silver, which the
          common people called _slips_.’” REED. See also
          Gifford’s note on Ben Jonson’s _Works_, vol. vi. p.
          77.

# 924:

          _mark_] See note, p. 226.

# 925:

          _push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 926:

          _kneeling after the play_] It was formerly the custom
          for the players, at the conclusion of the play, to
          kneel down and pray for their patrons: the royal
          companies for the king or queen, those of noblemen for
          the particular lord to whom they belonged.

# 927:

          _vild_] See note, p. 393.

# 928:

          _How_] So ed. 1640. First ed. “Home.”

# 929:

          _properties_] See note, p. 308.

# 930:

          _A prize, a prize_] Old eds. “_a_ peece, _a_ peece,”
          which in Dodsley’s _Old Plays_ is altered to “a peace,
          a peace.”

# 931:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I haue.” This line is meant to form
          a couplet with the conclusion of Sir Bounteous’s
          speech and Harebrain’s question.

# 932:

          _what is she for a fool_] i.e. what fool is she: see
          Gifford’s note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. iii. p.
          397.

# 933:

          _mark_] See note, p. 226.

# 934:

          _We’ve_] Old eds. “We have.”

# 935:

          _Exeunt omnes_] Ed. 1640 has “_Exeunt._

              “_The end of the fifth and last Act: marching over
                         the Stage hand in hand._”

# 936:

          _The Catch_, &c.] Not found in first ed., is printed
          on the last leaf of ed. 1640.

# 937:

          _Aristippus_] A sort of wine: see Randolph’s drama
          called _Aristippus, or the Jovial Philosopher_, 1635.

# 938:

                _The Life and Death of Mrs. Mary Frith. Commonly
                Called Mal Cutpurse. Exactly Collected and now
                Published for the Delight and Recreation of all
                Merry disposed Persons._ _London_, 1662, 12mo.
                Prefixed to it is her portrait in a male dress
                (with an eagle, a lion, and an ape beside her),
                under which are these lines;

                “See here the Presidesse o’th pilfring Trade,
                Mercuryes second, Venus’s onely Mayd,
                Doublet and breeches, in a Un’form dresse,
                The Female Humurrist, a Kickshaw messe:
                Heres no attraction that your fancy greets,
                But if her Features please not, read her Feats.”

                Of this rare and curious volume a portion at
                least seems to be authentic.

# 939:

                Note on _Twelfth Night_, act i. sc. 3,—
                _Shakespeare_ (by Boswell), vol. xi. p. 357.

# 940:

                Note on _id._, ibid.

# 941:

                Smith’s _Lives of Highwaymen, &c._ vol. ii. p.
                142, ed. 1719.

# 942:

                See a note, signed N., _From a MS. in the
                British Museum_, (what a reference!) in
                Dodsley’s _Old Plays_, vol. xii. p. 398, ed.
                1780.

# 943:

                _Biog. Hist. of Engl._ vol. ii. p. 408, ed.
                1775.

# 944:

                Note on _Twelfth Night_, act i. sc. 3,—Malone’s
                _Shakespeare_ (by Boswell), vol. xi. p. 356.

# 945:

                This excellent comedy has been reprinted by Mr.
                Collier in a supplementary volume to Dodsley’s
                _Old Plays_.

# 946:

                “Mulsack the chimney-sweeper” is mentioned as
                one of Moll’s companions in her _Life_, p. 82.

# 947:

                _were_] Old ed. “was.”

# 948:

                _termers_] Here Reed cites a passage from
                Dekker’s _Belman of London_, concerning those
                rogues that “_are called_ TERMERS _and they ply
                Westminster-hall: Michaelmas Terme is their
                harvest_:” see also my note, p. 107. I may
                observe, however, that _termer_ did not always
                mean a person of ill repute: “with a countrey
                gentleman or _Tearmer_.” _Greene’s Ghost
                Haunting Conicatchers_, 1626, sig. D 3.

# 949:

                _for sixpence_] “The price of a play at this
                time.” _Id._

# 950:

                _and_] i.e. if.

# 951:

                _vast theatre_] i.e. the Fortune, in Golden or
                Golding Lane, St. Giles’s, Cripplegate. It was
                built by Henslowe, and Alleyn (the founder of
                Dulwich College), in 1599-1600. It was eighty
                feet square on the outside, and fifty-five feet
                square within. It was destroyed by fire in 1621.
                See Collier’s _Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poetry_,
                vol. iii. p. 302.

# 952:

                _beside_] Old ed. “besides.”

# 953:

          _a trencher_] "At this time pewter was not introduced
          into common use. Our ancestors were content with
          wooden trenchers, and these were even to be found at
          the tables of our nobility and persons of good
          fashion. Among the orders for household servants,
          devised by John Haryngton, 1566, and renewed by his
          son, 1592, it is directed, ‘That no man waite at the
          table without _a trencher_ in his hand, except it
          be uppon good cause, on paine of 1_d._’ _Nugæ
          Antiquæ_, vol. ii. p. 267, ed. 1779. See also the
          _Northumberland Household-Book_, p. 354. _Trenchers_
          are still used in some colleges and inns-of-court,
          particularly in Lincoln’s-Inn." REED.

# 954:

          _falling bands_] See note, p. 218.—“In Evelyn’s
          _Discourse on Medals_, 1697, p. 108, is the head of
          Charles I. crowned, in the garter-robes, and wearing
          _a falling band_; ‘which new mode,’ says Mr. Evelyn,
          ‘succeeded the cumbersome ruff: but neither did the
          bishops or judges give it over so soon, the Lord
          Keeper Finch being, I think, the very first.’” REED.

# 955:

          _ingeniously_] i.e. sincerely: _ingenious_ is
          frequently used for _ingenuous_ by our old writers:
          “reasons ... which, I must _ingeniously_ confesse,
          were both many and weighty.” Brathwait’s _Honest
          Ghost_, 1658, p. 46.

# 956:

          _dined_] Old ed. “dyed.”

# 957:

          _bond_] Was formerly synonymous with _band_. See
          notes, vol. i. pp. 245, 481.

# 958:

          _marks_] See note, p. 226.

# 959:

          _that_] Old ed. “that’s.”

# 960:

          _Adam Bell_] An outlaw, famous for his archery: see
          the beautiful ballad of _Adam Bel, Clym of the Cloughe
          and Wyllyam of Cloudesle_, of which the most correct
          text is in Ritson’s _Pieces of An. Pop. Poetry_.

# 961:

          _naughty pack_] In a note on this passage Reed says,
          “a _pack_ was formerly a name given to a lewd woman,”
          and that “it was also sometimes applied to the male
          sex.” The fact is, _naughty pack_ was a term of
          reproach applied commonly both to men and women.

# 962:

          _fond_] i.e. foolish.

# 963:

          _baffle_] Meant formerly to treat with insult, or
          mockery, or contempt. “Our names should be _baffuld_
          on euery booke-sellers stall.” Nash’s _Pierce
          Pennilesse_, sig. D 4, ed. 1595. “When he had
          _baffuld_ mee in print throughout England.” Nash’s
          _Haue with you to Saffron-walden_, sig. T 2, 1596.

             “Prithee, good Fido, goe and baffull him:
             Put an affront vpon him.”
                    Marmyon’s _Fine Companion_, sig. F, 1633.

# 964:

          _watermen_] “Taylor the water-poet asserts, that at
          this time, between Windsor and Gravesend, there were
          not fewer than forty thousand watermen.” REED.

# 965:

          _goll_] A cant term for hand—fist, paw.

# 966:

          _roaring boy_] See prefatory matter, p. 427.

# 967:

          _what is’t you lack_] See note, vol. i. p. 447.

# 968:

          _minces tobacco_] When this play was written tobacco
          was sold by apothecaries:

                  "Or in th’ Apothicaryes shop bee seene
                  To wrap Druggs, or to dry Tobacco in."

                  _Certain Elegies, with [Fitz Geffrey’s] Satyrs
                         and Epigrams_, 1620, sig. G 4.

# 969:

          _bankrout_] i.e. bankrupt.

# 970:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 971:

          _striker_] i.e. wencher.

# 972:

          _as a naked boy in a phial_] “I suppose he means an
          abortion preserved in spirits.” STEEVENS.

# 973:

          _make_] Old ed. “makes.”

# 974:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 975:

          _bear her in hand_] i.e. keep her in expectation.

# 976:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 977:

          _But is this, &c._] “She gives him money, and he
          pretends that he receives only tobacco from Mrs.
          Gallipot.” COLLIER.

# 978:

          _drink_] To _drink_ (i.e. smoke) tobacco was a very
          common expression.

# 979:

          _Paul’s_] See note, vol. i. p. 418.

# 980:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 981:

          _the twelvepenny-stool gentlemen_] i.e. gentlemen who
          pay twelvepence for a stool to sit upon the stage
          during the performance: see note, p. 412. This is one
          of the passages which led Malone to think that
          “persons were suffered to sit on the stage only in the
          private playhouses (such as Blackfriars, &c.)” _Hist.
          Acc. of Engl. Stage_, p. 78—_Shakespeare_ (by
          Boswell), vol. iii.: but Mr. Collier has shewn that
          the practice was not confined to private theatres:
          _Hist. of Engl. Dr. Poetry_, vol. iii. p. 352.

# 982:

          _hench-boy_] i.e. page.

# 983:

          _mouse_] See note, p. 137.

# 984:

          _resolve_] i.e. satisfy.

# 985:

          _gear_] i.e. stuff.

# 986:

          _saveguard_] i.e., properly, a sort of large
          petticoat, worn by women over the other clothes, to
          protect them from soiling.

# 987:
          GOS. _Moll, Moll!_  ]One speech in old ed., with the
          GREEN. _Pist, Moll!_ ]prefix "_All._"—The exclamation
          “pist” again occurs at p. 468. I unnecessarily altered
          it into “hist” at p. 268.

# 988:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 989:

          _buona roba_] See note, vol. i. p. 258.

# 990:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 991:

          _sew_] Old ed. “sowes.”

# 992:

          _Brainford_] The old form of _Brentford_.

# 993:

          _push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 994:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 995:

          _Saint Antling’s bell_] See note, vol. i. p. 503.—“At
          St. Antholin’s church there used to be a lecture early
          in the morning, which was much frequented by the
          puritans of the times.” REED.

# 996:

          _spittle_] i.e. hospital. “The reuenge was common as
          the Law, or as the blowes of a _Spittle_ whore.” _The
          Owles Almanacke_ (by Dekker), 1618, p. 18.—Gifford
          wished to make a distinction between _spittle_ and
          _spital_ (note on Massinger’s _City Madam_, act iii.
          sc. 1); but see Todd’s Johnson’s _Dict._, and Nares’s
          _Gloss._ in v.

# 997:

          _burgh_] Or _burre_ is “a broad ring of iron behind
          the handle [of a tilting lance], which burre is
          brought into the sufflue or rest, when the tilter is
          ready to run against his enimy, or prepareth himself
          to combate or encounter his adverse party.” R. Holme’s
          _Acad. of Armoury_, cited by Nares, _Gloss._ in v.

# 998:

          _the high German’s size_] So afterwards, in act iii.
          sc. 1, Moll exclaims,

                              "a name which I’d tear out
                  From _the high German’s_ throat &c.,

          where Reed remarks, “He seems to have been noted for
          his extraordinary strength, and is probably the same
          person mentioned in _The Curtaine Drawer of the
          World_, 1612, 4to. p. 27. ‘Aske but this Curtaine
          Drawer and he will tell you, that few there are, and
          those escape very hardly like the bird out of the
          snare, like _the German_ out of Woodstreet, or those
          that commit murder, or like him that escapes the
          hangman from the tree of execution.’” Nares (_Gloss._
          in _German_, _High_,) says, he was "probably a tall
          German, shown for a sight ... I do not agree with the
          editor [Reed], that the same person is meant by the
          German ‘who escaped out of Woodstreet.’ The _high
          German_ must have been some man generally known for
          strength or size; that the same person should also
          have had a very narrow escape from Wood Street, is
          possible to be sure, but very improbable. Perhaps the
          _high German_ was the famous fencer, whose feats are
          thus recorded: ‘Since the _German fencer_ cudgelled
          most of our English fencers, now about 5 moneths
          past.’ ["a moneth past"—in my copy, p. 7.] _Owle’s
          Almanacke_ [by Dekker], publ. 1618, p. 6. High German
          may, however, be only in opposition to low German, or
          Dutch; as, for a long time, _high German_ quack
          doctors were in repute."

# 999:

          _same wine_] i.e. bastard: see note, p. 347.

# 1000:

          _pist_] See note, p. 460.

# 1001:

          _pigsnie_] i.e. little pig—a term of endearment.

# 1002:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 1003:

          _at Parlous Pond_] “This, I imagine, is the same place
          now called _Peerless Pool_. It is situated near
          Old-street Road, and was formerly a spring that,
          overflowing its banks, caused a very dangerous pond,
          which, from the number of persons who lost their lives
          there, obtained the name of _Perilous Pool_. To
          prevent these accidents, it was in a manner filled up
          until the year 1743, when it was enclosed, and
          converted into a bathing-place.” REED. _Parlous_ is a
          corruption of _perilous_.

# 1004:

          _Hey, trug_, &c.] “I suppose _Trug_ is the name of the
          spaniel whom he is sending into the water to hunt
          ducks; or else that he means to say _trudge, trudge_.”
          STEEVENS. Perhaps _trug_ is equivalent to bitch: see
          note, p. 222.

# 1005:

          _Come, let’s away_, &c.] An imperfect couplet: see
          notes, p.7 of this vol. and p. 424 of vol. i.

# 1006:

          _two-leav’d tongues_] Old ed. “_two leaud tongues_.”
          The last editor of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_ printed “two
          lewd tongues,”—_leaud_ being, as he thinks, the old
          spelling of _lewd_. Qy. “_two_ loud?”

# 1007:

          _Virginia_] “Great efforts were used about this time
          to settle Virginia.” REED.

# 1008:

          _And so_, &c.] A quotation, probably.

# 1009:

          _long coats_, &c.] i.e. petticoats: in some parts of
          Scotland they are still worn by male idiots of the
          lowest class.

# 1010:

          _great Dutch slop_] i.e. large wide breeches.

# 1011:

          _towards_] i.e. in preparation.

# 1012:

          _Many one_, &c.] A word, perhaps a line, wanting here.

# 1013:

          _good man’s_] This seems to be an allusion to the
          proverbial saying, “God’s a good man:” see _Much ado
          about Nothing_, act iii. sc. 5, Malone’s _Shakespeare_
          (by Boswell), vol. vii. p. 104, and Steevens’s note.

# 1014:

          _give but aim_] See note, p. 335.

# 1015:

          _tester_] i.e. a sixpence: see note, vol. i. p. 258.

# 1016:

          _phrampel_] “_Phrampel_ here appears to signify
          _fiery_ or _mettlesome_.” REED. It is written also
          _frampold_, _frampul_, &c., and generally signifies
          vexatious, saucy, peevish, &c.

# 1017:

          _vild_] See note, p. 393.

# 1018:

          _baffle_] See note, p. 449. In _The Devil is an Ass_,
          act iv. sc. 3, is a stage-direction, “_Baffles_ him
          [i.e. passes him with some act of contempt] and exit.”
          B. Jonson’s _Works_, by Gifford, vol. v. p. 127.

# 1019:

          _Exit_] Old ed. “_Exit_ Coachman with his whip.”

# 1020:

          _safeguard_] See note, p. 459.

# 1021:

          _bankrout_] i.e. bankrupt.

# 1022:

          _Brainford_] See note, p. 463. The inn called _The
          Three Pigeons_ was resorted to by company of an
          inferior rank. At a later period, when puritanism had
          silenced the stage, it was kept by the celebrated
          actor, Lowin.

# 1023:

          _untruss a point_] See note, vol. i. p. 367.

# 1024:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 1025:

          _liberal_] i.e. too free.

# 1026:

          _high German’s throat_] See note, p. 466.

# 1027:

          _leiger_] See note, p. 316. That the last editor of
          this play should have had any doubts about the meaning
          of the word, is somewhat strange.

# 1028:

          _wedlocks_] “i.e. wives. So in _The Poetaster_ [by B.
          Jonson], act iv. sc. 3, ‘Which of these is thy
          _wedlock_, Menelaus?’” REED.

# 1029:

          _familiar_] i.e. a demon—properly, such as attends on
          a sorcerer or witch.

# 1030:

          _viage_] i.e. voyage (see Todd’s Johnson’s _Dict_. in
          v.), excursion.

# 1031:

          _Three Pigeons_] See note, p. 479. I suspect that this
          speech was intended to close with a hobbling couplet.

# 1032:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 1033:

          _to his umbles_] “i.e. his inside. _Umbles_ are the
          entrails of a deer.” STEEVENS.

# 1034:

          _kyes_] “i.e. cries. She imitates the jargon talked by
          nurses to infants.” STEEVENS.

# 1035:

          _mouse_] See note, p. 137.

# 1036:

          _water_] Old ed. “waters.”

# 1037:

          _apron husbands_] “i.e. husbands who follow their
          wives as if tied to their _apron_-strings.” STEEVENS.

# 1038:

          _cotqueans_] i.e. men who meddle with female affairs.

# 1039:

          _Laxton, with bays_, &c.] An imperfect couplet: see
          notes, p. 7 of this vol. and p. 424 of vol. i.

# 1040:

          _Pan-da-rus ... Cres-sida_] So in old ed., to mark the
          difficulty with which such hard names were read by
          mistress Gallipot.

# 1041:

          _bankrout_] i.e. bankrupt.

# 1042:

          _steal, steal_] Qy. ought these words to be considered
          as a stage-direction?

# 1043:

          _Where_] i.e. whereas.

# 1044:

          _made sure_] i.e. affianced: compare vol. ii. p. 39.

# 1045:

          _Since last I saw him_, &c.] Perhaps this scene is by
          Dekker: in his _Whore of Babylon_, 1607, we find

          “Fiue summers haue scarce _drawn_ their glimmering
             nights
          _Through the Moons siluer bowe_.”
                                                      Sig. A 4.

# 1046:

          _slight_] See note, p. 250.

# 1047:

          _sirrah_] When this play was written, and long after,
          a female was frequently so addressed: see my note on
          Webster’s _Works_, vol. iii. p. 23.

# 1048:

          _sadness_] i.e. seriousness.

# 1049:

          _Byrlady_] Old ed. “Be lady:” see note, vol. i. p.
          365.

# 1050:

          _ramp_] i.e. ramping, rampant creature: “although she
          were a lustie _bounsing rampe_, somewhat like
          Gallemella,” &c. G. Harvey’s _Pierces Supererogation_,
          1593, p. 145.

# 1051:

          _saveguard ... slop_] See notes, pp. 459, 472.

# 1052:

          _placket_] Has been variously explained—the opening of
          the petticoat—the forepart of the shift or petticoat:
          Nares (_Gloss._ in v.) insists that it meant only a
          petticoat, generally an under one.

# 1053:

          _a noise of fiddlers_] i.e. a company of musicians,—an
          expression frequently occurring: “those terrible
          _noyses_, with thredbare cloakes, that liue by red
          lattises and Iuy-bushes, hauing authority to thrust
          into any mans roome, onely speaking but this, Will you
          haue any musicke?” Dekker’s _Belman of London_, 1608,
          sig. B 4.

# 1054:

          _roaring boys_] See p. 427.

# 1055:

          _ningles_] Or _ingles_ (the former being an
          abbreviation of _mine ingles_), i.e. favourites. The
          word was used (and perhaps originally) in a worse
          sense: see vol. i. p. 301.

# 1056:

          _the Counters ... Why, ’tis an university_] See note,
          vol. i. p. 392.

# 1057:

                 _Then is he held a freshman and a sot,_
                 _And never shall commence_]

          “The speaker is here employing terms in use only at
          the university.” STEEVENS.

# 1058:

          _Master’s side_, &c.] See note, vol. i. p. 392.

# 1059:

          _beg plac’d_] i.e. beg to be plac’d: but qy. “be
          _plac’d_?”

# 1060:

          _Lies_] i.e. He lies, he shall lie.

# 1061:

          _puttocks_] i.e. kites.

# 1062:

          _sprites_] Old ed. “spirits.”

# 1063:

          _blue coat_] See note, p. 26.

# 1064:

          _mace_] See note, p. 372.

# 1065:

          _walk_] Old ed. “walkes.”

# 1066:

          _these men-widwives_, &c.] So in _The Whore of
          Babylon_, 1607, by Dekker (see note, p. 490): “Doe not
          you know, mistresse, what Serieants are? ... why they
          are certaine _men-midwiues, that neuer bring people to
          bed_, but when they are sore in labour, that no body
          els can deliuer them.” Sig. D.

# 1067:

          _Trap._ _Honest servant_, &c.] Old ed. “BOTH. _Honest_
          Serieant _fly, flie Maister Dapper_,” &c.

# 1068:

          _marks_] See note, p. 226.

# 1069:

          _my German watch_] See note, p. 385.

# 1070:

          _marks_] See note, p. 226.

# 1071:

          _court-cupboard_] i.e. a moveable sideboard, or
          buffet, for displaying plate or other valuables: it
          was also called “_cupboard of plate_,” see p. 91.

# 1072:

          _lets_] i.e. hinders.

# 1073:

          _mysteries_] i.e. arts: but qy. “miseries?”

# 1074:

          _hose_] i.e. breeches.

# 1075:

          _owe_] Old ed. “owes.”

# 1076:

          _lays_] i.e. wagers.

# 1077:

          _beholding_] See note, vol. i. p. 441.

# 1078:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 1079:

          _swan above bridge_] When this play was written, the
          Thames abounded with swans.

# 1080:

          _the viol_, &c.] See note, p. 11.

# 1081:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 1082:

          _th’ Burse_] i.e. the New Exchange in the Strand.
          “Over this building, in the time of Middleton, were
          many shops where women’s finery was sold.” STEEVENS.

# 1083:

          _cavell’d_] So spelt in old ed. for the sake of the
          rhyme.

# 1084:

          _Between_, &c.] The old ed. gives this speech partly
          as prose, partly as verse. I have done what I could to
          arrange the lines.

# 1085:

          _sigh_] Old ed. "sight,"—which, perhaps, Middleton
          wrote; for I think I have seen that form of the word.
          The preterite of the verb _sigh_ was often written
          _sight_.

# 1086:

          _plunge_] i.e. difficulty, straits.

# 1087:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 1088:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 1089:

          _puttock_] i.e. a kite.

# 1090:

          _roses_] “i.e. roses anciently worn in shoes.”
          STEEVENS. They were made of ribbons gathered into a
          knot, and were sometimes of a preposterous size.

# 1091:

          _sirrah_] See note, p. 491.

# 1092:

          _fline_] i.e. flown.

# 1093:

          _a cramp ring_] i.e. a ring, which having been
          solemnly consecrated on Good Friday, was supposed to
          have the power of preventing the cramp. See in
          Waldron’s _Literary Museum_, 1792, a reprint of _The
          Ceremonies of Blessing Cramp-Rings on Good Friday,
          used by the Catholick Kings of England_.

# 1094:

          _Three Pigeons_] See note, p. 479.

# 1095:

          _incontinently_] i.e. immediately.

# 1096:

          _poking my ruff_] See note, vol. i. p. 279.

# 1097:

          _rest_] i.e. a support,—without it the soldiers could
          not manage to fire the old muskets, which were very
          heavy and unwieldy.

# 1098:

          _pursenets_] i.e. nets, the mouths of which were drawn
          together by a string.

# 1099:

          _cog_] i.e. lie, wheedle.

# 1100:

          _ingle_] i.e. coax.

# 1101:

          _a riven dish_] “i.e. a broken dish.” REED.

# 1102:

          _frumped_] i.e. mocked.

# 1103:

          _till all split_] “This expression occurs in many old
          plays. See the notes of Dr. Farmer, Mr. Steevens, and
          Mr. Malone, on _Midsummer Night’s Dream_, act i. sc.
          2.” REED. It occurs in several old plays at least; and
          (as Nares observes in _Gloss._) denotes violence of
          action.

# 1104:

          _Brainford_] See note, p. 463.

# 1105:

          _gib_] Is, properly, a male cat—but sometimes applied,
          as a term of reproach, to a woman: “She is a tonnysh
          _gyb_,” says old Skelton, in _Elynour Rummyng_, v. 99.

# 1106:

          _a mumming_] i.e. a masquing, in which originally the
          performers used gesticulation only, without speaking:
          mistress Openwork puns on the different meanings of
          _mask_ and _masque_.

# 1107:

          _vildest_] i.e. vilest: see note, p. 393.

# 1108:

          _sprites_] Old ed. “spirits.”

# 1109:

          _Your two flags_] “Alluding to the flags which were
          placed formerly on the tops of playhouses.” REED.

# 1110:

          _Mis. G._] Old ed. “Mist. Open.”

# 1111:

          _Westward ho_] A comedy, by Dekker and Webster, which
          was first printed in 1607, and which may be found in
          my edition of Webster’s _Works_, vol. iii. The scene
          lies partly in London and partly in Brentford; and a
          “western voyage” from the former to the latter place
          gives the title to the play—_westward ho!_ being one
          of the exclamations used by the watermen who plied on
          the Thames.

# 1112:

          _A stale_, &c.] i.e. a pretence or cover under which
          he keeps a harlot: the _stale_, or _stalking-horse_,
          was the real or artificial horse behind which
          sportsmen approached their game.

# 1113:

          _Cold Harbour_] See note, p. 58.—Nares (_Gloss._),
          citing the present passage, says, that _Cold Harbour_
          “seems to be used as a kind of metaphorical term for
          the grave.”

# 1114:

          _Push_] See note, vol. i. p. 29.

# 1115:

          _western pug_] “I doubt the sand-eyde asse will kicke
          like a _Westerne Pugge_, if I rubbe him on the gall.”
          Greene’s _Theeves falling out_, &c., sig. C, ed.
          1637.—“In so much that [during the plague] euen the
          _Westerne Pugs_ receiuing mony here, have tyed it in a
          bag at the end of their barge, and so trailed it
          through the Thames,” &c. Dekker’s _Wonderfull Yeare_,
          1603, sig. F 3.

# 1116:

          _Open._] Old ed. “Mist. Open.”

# 1117:

          _brave girls, worth gold_] The expression seems to
          have been proverbial; one of Heywood’s plays is
          entitled _The Fair Maid of the West, or A Girle worth
          gold_, 1631.

# 1118:

          _the Brazen Head_] See _Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay_
          (first printed in 1594) in my ed. of Greene’s _Dram.
          Works_, and the extract there given from the prose
          tract, _The Famous Historie of Friar Bacon_ (on which
          that play is founded), “How Fryer Bacon made a Brazen
          Head to speake, by the which hee would have walled
          England about with Brasse,” vol. i. pp. 141, 215. The
          friars lost all their labour through the folly of a
          servant named Miles, who having been set to watch the
          Head while they retired to rest, neglected to call
          them when at last it spoke.

# 1119:

          _Open._] Old ed. “Mist. Open.”

# 1120:

          _sumner_] See notes, pp. 29, 170.

# 1121:

          _aloof off_] See note, vol. i. p. 427.

# 1122:

            _Open._ ] Old ed. here, and afterwards, “_Omnes_.”
            _Gos._, _&c._ ]

# 1123:

          _snuffling_] Old ed. “snafling;” but see his next
          speech.

# 1124:

          _fagary_] i.e. vagary.

# 1125:

          _if you be remember’d_] i.e. if you recollect.

# 1126:

          _tawny-coat_] “_Tawny_ was the usual dress of a
          summoner or apparitor.” REED.

# 1127:

          _I must lose my hair_, &c.] “Alluding to the
          consequences of lewdness, one of which, in the first
          appearance of the disease in Europe, was the loss of
          hair.” REED.

# 1128:

          _A knack to know an honest man_] _A Pleasant Conceited
          Comedie, called, A knacke to know an honest Man, As it
          hath beene sundrie times plaied about the Citie of
          London_, was printed in 1596, the author unknown.

# 1129:

          _gelt feathers_] i.e. golden feathers. But I am by no
          means confident that I have restored the right
          reading. Old ed. “Get _fethers_.”

# 1130:

          _scape_] Old ed. “scapt.”

# 1131:

          _Irish_] “Is a game which differs very slightly from
          backgammon. The manner of playing it is described in
          _The Compleat Gamester_, 1680, p. 109.” REED.

# 1132:

          _bearing_] “_Bear_ as fast as you can ... when you
          _come to bearing_, have a care,” &c. _The Compleat
          Gamester_, pp. 155-6, ed. 1674.

# 1133:

          _And that_, &c.] A line preceding this one seems to
          have dropt out: perhaps another is wanting after _And
          yet to try_, &c.

# 1134:

          _Meg of Westminster’s courage_] Meg of Westminster, or
          long Meg of Westminster, was a virago, of whom
          frequent mention is made by our early dramatists; and
          indeed, like the heroine of the present piece, she had
          the honour of figuring in a play called after her, in
          1594 (see Malone’s _Shakespeare_, by Boswell, vol.
          iii. p. 304). At that period, however, she is supposed
          to have been dead. She is introduced in an ante-masque
          in B. Jonson’s _Fortunate Isles_—_Works_, vol. viii.
          p. 79, ed. Giff. A 4to tract, entitled _The Life of
          Long Meg of Westminster: containing the mad merry
          prankes she played in her life time, not onely in
          performing sundry quarrels with divers ruffians about
          London; but also how valiantly she behaued her selfe
          in the warres of Bolloingne_, was printed (perhaps not
          for the first time) in 1635; and forms part of
          _Miscellanea Antiqua Anglicana_, 1816, 4to.

# 1135:

          _puttocks_] i.e. kites.

# 1136:

          _like a firework_, &c.] So Dekker (see notes, pp. 490,
          503) in his _Whore of Babylon_, 1607;

             “Let vs behold these _fire-workes, that must run
             Vpon short lines of life_.”
                                                 Sig E 4.

# 1137:

          _linstock_] Or _lintstock_—a stick with the match (the
          lint) at one end of it, used in firing cannon.

# 1138:

          _galley-foist_] i.e. a long barge with oars: it
          frequently means that of the lord mayor.

# 1139:

          _shovel-board shilling_] i.e. a shilling used at the
          game of _shovel-board_, and which was always smooth,
          that it might “slide away” easily.

# 1140:

          _strouts_] i.e. struts.

# 1141:

          _boot-halers_] “Cotgrave explains _Picoreur_ to be ‘a
          _boot-haler_ (in a friend’s country), a ravening or
          filching souldier.’” REED. Freebooters, plunderers,
          _halers_ of _boot_ (profit), or _booty_.

# 1142:

          _ging_] i.e. gang. “This substitution of _i_ for _a_,”
          says Gifford, in a note on the word, “was common in
          our author’s days.” B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. iv. p.
          161. But the fact is, _ging_ is of great antiquity:
          “The gouernour of this _gyng_.” _Gawayn and the Green
          Knight_, _MS. Cott. Nero A. X._ fol. 94.

# 1143:

          _corago_] “A corruption of _coraggio_, Ital.” COLLIER.

# 1144:

          _Bononia ... Bologna_] One and the same place!

# 1145:

          _Volterra_] Old ed. “Valteria.”

# 1146:

          _jobbering_] i.e. jabbering.

# 1147:

          _Not a cross_] i.e. not a penny.—_Cross_, a piece of
          money, many coins having a _cross_ on one side.

# 1148:

          _skeldering_] “A cant term, generally applied to a
          vagrant, and often used by our ancient poets. It
          appears to have been particularly appropriated to
          those vagabonds who wander about under the name of
          soldiers, borrowing or begging money.” REED. See also
          Gifford’s note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. ii. p. 8:
          “_Skeldring_ was a cant term for impudent begging,”
          &c.:—and Dekker’s _Gull’s Horn-book_, p. 129, reprint;
          “whom he may _skelder_ [i.e. cheat, defraud], after
          the genteel fashion, of money.”

# 1149:

          _glasiers_] i.e. “eyes.” Dekker’s _Lanthorne and
          Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2.

# 1150:

          _black patches_] Were used as an ornament, not only by
          ladies, but also by some effeminate gallants of those
          days.

# 1151:

          _Isle of Dogs_] Opposite Greenwich. It seems to have
          been a place where persons took refuge from their
          creditors and the officers of justice.

# 1152:

          _whip-jack_] In Dekker’s _Belman of London_, 1608,
          sig. D 2, the description of “A Whipiacke” is much the
          same as that which Moll gives here.

# 1153:

          _horns for the thumb_] Pickpockets were said to place
          a case, or thimble, of horn on their thumbs, to
          support the edge of the knife in the act of cutting
          purses: see Gifford’s note on B. Jonson’s _Works_,
          vol. iv. p. 413.

# 1154:

          _nipping Christian_] i.e. cutpurse.

# 1155:

          _maunderer upon the pad_] “_Mawnding_, asking
          (begging).” “_Pad_, a way.” Dekker’s _Lanthorne and
          Candlelight_, 1612, sig C 2.

# 1156:

          _an upright man_] “Is a sturdy big-bonde knaue, that
          neuer walkes but (like a Commander) with a short
          truncheon in his hand, which hee cals his Filchman. At
          Markets, Fayres, and other meetings his voice amongst
          Beggars is of the same sound that a Constables is of,
          it is not to be controld. He is free of all the shiers
          in England, but neuer stayes in any place long, &c.
          &c.... These [upright men] cary the shapes of
          soldiers, and can talke of the Low Countries, though
          they neuer were beyond Dover.” Dekker’s _Belman of
          London_, 1608, sig C. 3.

# 1157:

          _a wild rogue_] “Is a spirit that cares not in what
          circle he rises, nor into the company of what Diuels
          hee falles: in his swadling clouts is he marked to be
          a villaine, and in his breeding is instructed to be
          so.... These Wilde Rogues (like wilde geese) keepe in
          flocks, and all the day loyter in the fields, if the
          weather bee warme, and at Bricke-kils, or else
          disperse themselues in cold weather, to rich mens
          doores, and at night haue their meetings in Barnes or
          other out places,” &c. _Id._ sig. D.

# 1158:

          _an angler_] “Is a lymb of an Vpright man, as beeing
          deriued from him: their apparell in which they walke
          is commonly frieze Jerkins and gally slops: in the day
          time, they beg from house to house, not so much for
          reliefe, as to spy what lyes fit for their nets, which
          in the night following they fish for. The Rod they
          angle with is a staffe of fiue or six foote in length,
          in which within one inch of the top is a little hole
          boared quite thorough, into which hole they put an
          yron hooke, and with the same doe they angle at
          windowes about midnight, the draught they pluck vp
          beeing apparell, sheetes, couerlets, or whatsoeuer
          their yron hookes can lay hold of,” &c. _Id._ sig. C
          4.

# 1159:

          _a ruffler_] “The next in degree to him [the
          Vpright man] is cald a Ruffler: the Ruffler and
          the Vpright-man are so like in conditions, that
          you would sweare them brothers: they walke with
          cudgels alike; they profess armes alike.... These
          commonly are fellowes that haue stood aloofe in
          the warres, and whilst others fought, they tooke
          their heeles and ran away from their Captaine, or
          else they haue bin Seruing-men, whome for their
          behauiour no man would trust with a liuery,” &c.
          _Id._ _ibid._

# 1160:

          _the salomon_] i.e. “the masse.” Dekker’s _Lanthorne
          and Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 3.

# 1161:

          _kinchin mort in her slate_] Old ed.
          "kitchin-_mort_."—“Kinching-morts are girles of a
          yeare or two old, which the Morts (their mothers) cary
          at their backes in their Slates (which in the
          Canting-Tongue are Sheetes) if they haue no children
          of their owne, they will steale them from others, and
          by some meane disfigure them, that by their parents
          they shall neuer be knowne.” Dekker’s _Belman of
          London_, 1608, sig. D 3.

# 1162:

          _my dell and my dainty wild dell_] Dell is a girl yet
          undebauched: “these Dells are reserued for the
          Vpright-men, &c.... Of these Dells, some are termed
          Wilde Dells, and those are such as are born and
          begotten vnder a hedge: the other are yong wenches
          that either by death of parents, the villainie of
          Executors, or the crueltie of maisters and mistresses,
          fall into this infamous and damnable course of life.”
          _Id._ sig. D 3, 4.

# 1163:

          _I’ll tumble this next darkmans in the stromme_l, &c.]
          i.e. I’ll tumble this next night in the straw, and
          drink good drink (_baufe_ being probably, as Reed has
          observed, a mistake for _bouse_), and eat a fat pig, a
          cock (or capon), and a duck. See Dekker’s _Lanthorne
          and Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2, 3.

# 1164:

          _old_] i.e. abundant.

# 1165:

          _bousing ken_] i.e. ale-house. See Dekker’s _Lanthorne
          and Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2.

# 1166:

          _You are no pure rogues_] See note, vol. i. p. 169.

# 1167:

          _lib ken or our stalling ken_] i.e. our house to lie
          in, or our house to receive stolen goods. See Dekker’s
          _Lanthorne and Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2, 3 (where
          “Stuling _ken_.”)

# 1168:

          _queer cuffin ... ben cove_, &c.] Old ed. “_ben_
          caue.” “The word Coue or Cofe, or Cuffin, signifies a
          man, a fellow, &c. But differs something in his
          propertie, according as it meetes with other wordes:
          For a Gentleman is called A Gentry Coue, or Cofe: A
          good fellow is a Bene Cofe: a Churle is called a Quier
          Cuffin; Quier signifies naught,” &c. _Id._ sig. C.

# 1169:

          _pedlar’s French_] “That pedlers french, or that
          Canting language, which is to be found among none but
          Beggars.” Dekker’s _Belman of London_, 1608, sig. C.

# 1170:

          _Ben mort_, &c.] i.e. Good wench, shall you and I rob
          a booth, rob a house, or cut a purse, and then we’ll
          lie down asleep under the woods (or bushes), &c.—Old
          ed. here, and in Moll’s repetition of the words,
          “_heaue a booth_.” See Dekker’s _Lanthorne and
          Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2, 3.

# 1171:

          _Cut benar_, &c.] i.e. Speak better words, and hold
          your hands and your legs. See _Id._ ibid.

# 1172:

          _heave a bough_] Moll, or rather the printer, has
          omitted the explanation of these words: see note, p.
          539.

# 1173:

          _Song by Moll and Tearcat_] The old ed. gives the
          first two lines to Moll, and prefixes “_T. Cat._” both
          to the third and tenth lines.

# 1174:

          _A gage_, &c. &c.] i.e. A quart pot of good wine in an
          ale-house of London is better than a cloak, meat,
          bread, butter-milk (or whey), or porridge, which we
          steal in the country. O I would lie all the day, O I
          would lie all the night, by the mass, under the woods
          (or bushes), by the mass, in the stocks, and wear
          bolts (or fetters), and lie till a palliard lay with
          my wench, so my drunken head might quaff wine well.
          Avast to the highway, let us hence, &c. See Dekker’s
          _Lanthorne and Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2, 3; and
          _The Groundworke of Conny-catching_, 1592, sig. A 2.
          In the fourth line, as Reed observes, “_lay_” should
          probably be “_lap_.” A _palliard_ is a beggar born:
          “he likewise is cald a Clapperdugeon: his vpper
          garment is an old cloake made of as many pieces
          patch’d together, as there be villanies in him,” &c.
          &c. Dekker’s _Belman of London_, 1608, sig. D.

# 1175:

          _stalled to the rogue_] “This done, the Grand Signior
          called for a Gage of Bowse, which belike signified a
          quart of drinke, for presently a pot of Ale being put
          into his hand, hee made the yong Squire kneele downe,
          and powring the full pot on his pate, vttered these
          wordes, I doe _stall thee to the Rogue_ by vertue of
          this soueraigne English liquor, so that henceforth it
          shall be lawfull for thee to Cant (that is to say) to
          be a Vagabond and Beg,” &c. Dekker’s _Belman of
          London_, 1608, sig. C. “_Stalling_, making or
          ordeyning.” Dekker’s _Lanthorne and Candlelight_,
          1612, sig. C 3.

# 1176:

          _bestow_] Old ed. “bestowes.”

# 1177:

          _boards_] “_Borde_, a shilling.” Dekker’s _Lanthorne
          and Candlelight_, 1612, sig. C 2.

# 1178:

          _cut ben whids_] i.e. speak good words. See _Id._
          ibid.

# 1179:

          _trine me on the cheats_] i.e. hang me on the gallows.
          See _Id._ sig. C 2, 3.

# 1180:

          _maundering_] See note, p. 536—but here it means—
          muttering, talking.

# 1181:

          _mouse_] See note, p. 137.

# 1182:

          _gallant ... brave_] i.e. smartly dressed.

# 1183:

          _strike_] “The act doing, is called striking.”
          Dekker’s _Belman of London_, 1608, sig. H 2.

# 1184:

          _shells_] “The money, the Shelles.” _Id._ ibid.

# 1185:

            _L. Nol._ ] Old ed. here, and afterwards, “_Omnes_.”
            _S. Beau._, _&c._ ]

# 1186:

          _figging-law_, &c.] "In making of which law, two
          persons haue the chiefe voices, that is to say, the
          Cutpurse and the Pickpocket, and all the branches of
          this law reach to none but them and such as are made
          free denizens of their incorporation....

           “He that cuts the purse is called the Nip.
           He that is halfe with him is the Snap or the Cloyer.
           .   .   .   .   .   .   .
           He that picks the pocket is called a Foist.
           He that faceth the man, is the Stale.”
               Dekker’s _Belman of London_, 1608, sig. H.

# 1187:

          _at the Fortune_] See note, p. 435.

# 1188:

          _The rest_] Old ed. here, and afterwards, “_Omnes_.”

# 1189:

          _boiled_] “The spying of this villanie is called
          Smoaking or Boiling.” Dekker’s _Belman of London_,
          1608, sig. H 2.

# 1190:

          _the Swan_] One of the theatres on the Bankside.

# 1191:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 1192:

          _a synagogue_, &c.] According to Dekker, those who
          were under the figging-law had occasionally “solemne
          meetings in their hall.” _Belman of London_, 1608,
          sig. H 3.

# 1193:

          _pacus palabros_] _Pocas palabras_ (Spanish), i.e. few
          words—an expression which is found under various
          corrupted forms in our old writers. It is usually put
          into the mouths of low people, among whom it seems to
          have been current: “With this learned oration the
          Cobler was tutord: laid his finger on his mouth, and
          cried _paucos palabros_.” Dekker’s _Wonderfull Yeare_,
          1603, sig. E 4.

# 1194:

          _Of cheators, lifters, nips, foists, puggards,
          curbers_] “The Cheating Law, or the Art of winning
          money by false dyce: Those that practise this studie
          call themselues Cheators, the dyce Cheaters, and the
          money which they purchase Cheates.” Dekker’s _Belman
          of London_, 1608, sig. E 2.—“The Lifting Law ...
          teacheth a kind of lifting of goods cleane away.”
          Id. sig. G 3, where various kinds of lifters are
          described.—Concerning _nips_ and _foists_, see note,
          p. 544.—Of _puggards_ I can find no mention: _pugging_
          seems to mean thieving in the _Winter’s Tale_, act iv.
          sc. 2, Malone’s _Shakespeare_ (by Boswell), vol. xiv.
          p. 334; and, according to Steevens (_ad loc._), "is
          used by Greene in one of his pieces."—“The Curbing Law
          [teaches] how to hooke goodes out of a windowe.... He
          that hookes is cald the Curber.... The Hooke is the
          Courb.” Dekker, _ubi supra_, sig. G.

# 1195:

          _black-guard_] Meant, properly, the lowest drudges of
          the kitchen, turnspits, carriers of wood, coal, &c.,
          who attended the progresses of the court: see
          Gifford’s notes on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. ii. p.
          169; vii. p. 250.

# 1196:

          _love_] Old ed. “loues.”

# 1197:

          _have_] Old ed. “has.”

# 1198:

          _than your six wet towns_] “These I should apprehend
          to be Fulham, Richmond, Kingston, Hampton, Chertsey,
          Staines.—The other intermediate towns are, Chelsea,
          Battersea, Kew, Isleworth, Twickenham, and Walton. N.”
          Note in Reed’s ed. of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_.

# 1199:

          _ramp_] See note, p. 496.

# 1200:

          _gascoyne-bride_] i.e. a bride who wears _gascoynes_,—
          gaskins, or galligaskins.

# 1201:

          _plunges_] i.e. difficulties, perplexities.

# 1202:

          _cast_] Old ed. “casts.”

# 1203:

          _monthly_] “i.e. madly; as if under the influence of
          the moon.” STEEVENS.

# 1204:

          _resolv’d_] i.e. satisfied.

# 1205:

          _thumb_] See note, p. 536.

# 1206:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 1207:

          _Cheats_] Qy. “cheaters:” see p. 546 and note; but
          compare p. 554, last line but one.

# 1208:

          _angels_] See note, vol. i. p. 250.

# 1209:

          _me_] Old ed. “hee.”

# 1210:

          _and_] i.e. if.

# 1211:

          _cuck_] i.e. put me in the cucking-stool: see note, p.
          185.

# 1212:

          _gentlewomen_] i.e. Mrs. Gallipot, &c.—Old ed.
          “Gentlewoman.”

# 1213:

          _a book_] “Alluding, no doubt, to some tract of the
          time. Dekker himself wrote several of the kind; but it
          is not to be supposed that any of these are here so
          roughly handled.” COLLIER. Not to be supposed indeed;
          since Dekker wrote a portion of the present play.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

The author shifted between prose speech and blank verse, sometimes in
mid-speech. In this rendering, verse sections are given without blank
lines between speeches, with an indentation for each speech. Prose
speeches are given with a blank line between them.

The footnote scheme used lettered references, repeating a-z. On numerous
of occasions, letters were repeated, and sometimes skipped. The numeric
resequencing of notes here resolves those lapses. Footnotes are
sometimes referred to directly in a footnote by its letter designation.
The few direct references to a lettered note use the new numeric value.

Footnotes frequently refer to other notes, usually only by referring the
the page where they can be found. Sometimes those cross-references are
not accurate and the correct location cannot be ascertained.

Footnote 655 on p. 298 was misplaced. It should have followed the word
‘are’ rather than ‘gold and pearl’.

Errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected, and
are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the original.

  63.32    part of the first line of a couplet.[”]        Removed.
  194.34   put [t]hem together                            Added.
  144.31   _prevented_] See note, p. 4[0/9].              Replaced.
  233.1    I’ll work it so[,]                             Removed.
  290.22   [good.] Boy, be ready, boy.                    _sic_
  431.6    Moon-like changing dayes.[”]                   Added.
  508.2    is worth a pair of two[.]                      Added.
  365.32   [“]The same play upon words                    Removed.

                         ERRATA from Volume I.

                     A TRICK TO CATCH THE OLD ONE.

                             Vol. ii. p. 3.

We learn from Downes’s _Roscius Anglicanus_ that this play was one of
the early dramas revived between 1662 and 1665, p. 36, ed. Waldron.

                         Vol. ii. p. 5, l. 10.

_Longacre_] The editor of 1816 is mistaken: this word was used for an
estate in general; compare _Lady Alimony_, 1659, “It will run like
Quicksilver over all their Husbands Demains: and in very short time make
a quick dispatch of all his _Long acre_.” Sig. B 3.

A passage of _Gammer Gurton’s Needle_, which stands thus in the various
editions of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_,

     “Tome Tannkard’s cow (be gog’s bones) she set me up her sail,
     And flynging about his _halse aker_, fysking with her taile,”
     &c.

has drawn forth the following extraordinary note from Steevens: “I
believe we should read _halse anchor_, or _anker_, as it was anciently
spelt; a naval phrase. The _halse_ or _halser_ was a particular kind of
cable,” &c., vol. ii. p. 11, last ed.—If Steevens, or the other editors,
had only taken the trouble to look at the 4to of 1575, they would have
found the true reading—“_halfe aker_,” i.e. small bit of ground.

                             --------------


                          THE FAMILY OF LOVE.

                        Vol. ii. p. 106, l. 32.

_Weber remarks_, &c.] The mistake of Weber may be traced to Langbaine,
who says, “This Play is mentioned by Sir Thomas Bornwel in _The Lady of
Pleasure_, Act 1. Sc. 1.” _Acc. of English Dram. Poets_, p. 372.

                         Vol. ii. p. 118, note.

                “a corruption of _will_.”

Read

                “a corruption of _wilt_.”

                         Vol. ii. p. 125, l. 1.

_We saw Samson bear the town-gates on his neck from the lower to the
upper stage, with that life and admirable accord, that it shall never be
equalled, unless the whole new livery of porters set [to] their
shoulders_] Middleton seems to have had in his recollection a passage of
Shakespeare’s _Love’s Labour’s Lost_: “Sampson, master: he was a man of
good carriage, great carriage; for he carried the town-gates on his
back, like a porter.” Act i. sc. 2.

                        Vol. ii. p. 148, l. 28.

                   _familiar_] i.e. attendant demon.

                        Vol. ii. p. 178, l. 21.

_Europa’s sea-form_] Probably “sea-form” is used in the sense of
sea-seat,—the bull on which she sat.

                         Vol. ii. p. 194, l. 8.

_play Ambidexter_] I was wrong, I believe, in saying that this
expression has an allusion to Preston’s _Cambises_: it is by no means
uncommon.

                          YOUR FIVE GALLANTS.

                        Vol. ii. p. 255, l. 16.

                “_Hist!_ a supply.”

Read, with old ed.,

                “_Pist!_ a supply.”

See notes, vol. ii. pp. 460, 468.

                        Vol. ii. p. 264, l. 20.

        _E’en where his fear lies most, there will I meet him._

After this line insert “_Exit_;” and in the note, for “and thrown a
scarf over his face (see what follows), the audience,” &c., read “and
having made his exit at one door, had re-entered at the other with a
scarf thrown over his face, the audience,” &c.

                        Vol. ii. p. 268, l. 27.

                “Master, _hist_, master!”

Read, with old ed.,

                “Master, _pist_, master!”

See notes, vol. ii. pp. 460, 468.

                         Vol. ii. p. 290, l. 7.

         PUR. _Thy father gave the ram’s head, boy?_
         BOY. _No, you’re deceived; my mother gave that, sir._

The boy means that she made his father a cuckold: compare Dekker’s
_Owles Almanacke_, 1618; “Men whose wiues haue light heeles, are called
_Ramme-headed Cuckolds_,” p. 10.

                             --------------

                        A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS.

                        Vol. ii. p. 333, l. 25.

_the glory of his complement_] I doubt if Steevens’s explanation of this
passage be the right one, or if _complement_ mean here any thing more
than courtly address.

                         Vol. ii. p. 369, note.

Steevens’s remark, cited here by Reed, that a horse was sometimes
denominated a _footcloth_, is certainly wrong. “Sir Bounteous,” observes
Nares (_Gloss._ in v.), “is said to [be] alight[ed] from his
_footcloth_, as one might say, alighted from his saddle.”

                             --------------

                           THE ROARING GIRL.

                      Vol. ii. p. 466, last line.

_the high German’s size_] This person is probably alluded to in the
following passage of Dekker’s _Newes from Hell_, &c. 1606: “As for
Rapier and dagger, the Germane may be his journeyman.” Sig. B. See also
Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Knight of the Burning Pestle_—_Works_, vol. i.
p. 215, ed. Weber; and Shirley’s _Opportunity_—_Works_, vol. iii. p.
407, where Gifford observes, that “he seems to have been ‘a master of
fence,’ or common challenger.”

                        Vol. ii. p. 511, l. 27.

                     “’Twas like a _sigh_ of his.”

Since writing the note on this passage, I have met with the following
lines in _The Travailes of the Three English Brothers_, _&c._ (by Day,
W. Rowley, and Wilkins), 1607;

       “Pray Turke, let thy heart _sigth_ and thine eyes weepe.”
                                                       Sig. B 3.
       “To whose continuall kneelings, teares, and _sighthes_.”
                                                       Sig. B 4.

                      Vol. ii. p. 530, note 1134.

I am told that a gentleman in London possesses an edition of the _Life
of Long Meg of Westminster_, printed in 1582.

                         Vol. ii. p. 541, l. 1.

                   “Peck, pennam, _lay_, or popler.”

I ought to have substituted “lap” for “lay,” as Reed (see note)
suggests.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF THOMAS MIDDLETON, VOLUME 2 (OF 5) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


