The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Santa Claus' Book of Games and Puzzles
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Santa Claus' Book of Games and Puzzles

Publisher: J. H. Tingley

Release date: April 8, 2017 [eBook #54508]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by MFR, Harry Lam{~INVALID CHARACTER 97 4233B8ÿ
        nd the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
        generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SANTA CLAUS' BOOK OF GAMES AND PUZZLES ***

  Transcriber’s Notes

  Text printed in italics and bold face are here represented as _text_
  and =text=, respectively. Small capitals have been replaced by ALL
  CAPITALS; ^{text} represents superscript text.




  [Illustration: THE
  SANTA-CLAUS
  BOOK OF
  GAMES AND PUZZLES

  NEW-YORK
  JOHN H. TINGLEY
  152½ FULTON S^{T.}]




  THE
  SANTA CLAUS’
  BOOK OF
  GAMES AND PUZZLES:

  A

  COLLECTION OF RIDDLES, CHARADES, ENIGMAS,
  REBUSES, ANAGRAMS, LABYRINTHS,
  ACROSTICS, ETC.

  WITH A HIEROGLYPHIC PREFACE.

  OVER ONE HUNDRED ILLUSTRATIONS.

  NEW YORK:
  JOHN H. TINGLEY, 152½ FULTON STREET.

  1864.


  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863, by
  JOHN H. TINGLEY,
  In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court for the Southern District
  of New York.




CONTENTS.


                                              PAGE
  HIEROGLYPHIC PREFACE,                          v
  PUZZLES,                                       9
  CHARADES,                                     22
  RIDDLES,                                      42
  REBUSES,                                      51
  ENIGMAS,                                      69
  ACROSTICS,                                    78
  DECAPITATIONS,                                81
  NAMES OF PLACES ENIGMATICALLY EXPRESSED,      87
  CUTTINGS FOR PLANTING,                        94
  ANAGRAMS,                                     98
  CONUNDRUMS,                                  104
  LABYRINTHS,                  21, 41, 77, 93, 108


[Illustration: Sphinx]




PREFACE.


  _[Illustration: T]he Enigma is of such ancient and [Illustration: R E
  specked]able origin, t[Illustration: hat] [Illustration: eye] shall
  ask no_ =1 2 XQQ= _me_ =4= _offering this_ [Illustration: book] =2=
  _the public. Enigmatical_ =?? R= _frequent [Illustration: inn] the
  Scriptures, and [Illustration: inn] olden times of10 contained a
  [Illustration: grate] deal of_ =F=v=O=a=R=l=M=u=A=a=T=b=I=l=O=e=N=.

  _I [Illustration: inn]10’d, my [Illustration: deer] young friends_,
  =2= _combine instruction with_ =MUU=_ment: and do [Illustration: knot]
  f[Illustration: ear] [Illustration: butt] w[Illustration: hat] my
  [Illustration: X specked]ations will_ =B= _suf[Illustration:
  fish]ently real[Illustration: eyes]d. Right [Illustration: well]
  [Illustration: eye] know, little_ [Illustration: boy]=S= _and_
  [Illustration: girls], =U= [Illustration: can]_not fail_ =2= =B=
  _d[Illustration: light]ed w[Illustration: hen] [Illustration: eye] am
  ma[Illustration: king] such_ =F=[Illustration: forts] _in_
  [Illustration: ewer] =B ½=; _so, [Illustration: heart]ily shaking_
  =U= [Illustration: awl] _by the [Illustration: hand]_

  _[Illustration: eye] re[Illustration: mane]_

  _[Illustration: ewers] truly,_

  =SANTA CLAUS.=




PUZZLES, RIDDLES, ENIGMAS, &c.




PUZZLES.


[Illustration]


1

    Two thousand one hundred divided by two,
    Will show what all monkeys will readily do.


2

M a pain negative quaker vessel with indefinite article N V you and me
superior animal.

[Illustration]


3

  BB H1Y WINUUTER.


4

Exist merchandise of diminutive X instruments for writing es, a minute
breach testament drain a large vessel.


5

IIAR BB U R 2 X & UR IDAA R 2 MT 2 MUU NE 1 U R 2 EPQREN 2 XSII UR NRGG
O XQQS O X10U88 UR XSS 4 U O 2 B YYR.


6

OPM & BR FMNAC & TRR R UUULE NMEE 2 NRG & O 2 B SPCLE ODS 2 U DR LN.


7

O MLE B9 & FMN8 B4 U X10U8 NE XS C A YY DET.


8

Our to avow head ornament article of food is to a greater degree over
and above vag insect than the article of dress a grain of 4 air.


9

    A certain number call to mind,
    And very curious ’tis, you’ll find;
    For if of three it is bereft,
    The self-same number will be left!


10

Young girls’ nickname eros O provisions rated out are nickname of Susan,
fabled angel, small conjunction, one and one any O provision allotted,
of other work oars O those who rate, things laid by a hen sneering
speech.

[Illustration]


11

    If by nought you divide one hundred and ten,
    You will have a fine animal, treasured of men.


12

    Though but three letters I am named,
      My first two make a word of four;
    My third, split from a nation famed,
      Will leave a dweller on its shore.

    I’ve often wept o’er human guilt,
      And yet I never shed a tear;
    And though another’s blood I’ve spilt,
      The law has never made me fear.

    Though on the Arctic shores I dwell,
      And far in China always stay,
    ’Tis true I toll the Moscow bell,
      And yet you see me every day.

    My brother is of Moorish birth,
      And gladdens oft Sahara’s waste;
    I rightly estimate his worth,
      And find him pleasant to the taste.

    We, both united, form, you see,
      A mighty instrument of power;
    We are a despot’s firm decree,
      And cause republicans to cower.


13

A WORD OF FIVE LETTERS.

    If you my first by two divide,
      My fifth it will produce;
    Which, if you will by ten divide,
      My third you may peruse.
    Again my third by five divide,
     My second will appear;
    My second then by one divide,
      You’ll see my fourth quite clear;
    My whole at once you’ll plainly see,
    Which I advise you all to be.


14

    We two, when together, incite division,
    Yet either one of us preserves unity, and is ever present with
    every man.
          Bound together, we are leaders of harmony,
          Then, joining our heads, we lead armies.
          When crossed, we assist in every exaltation.
          Tied by the heels, we crown victory.


15

    Ni reevy andl dan micle I yam eb dofun
    Ni rai ni wreat sola redun dogrun,
    Fo saurivo tross I ma, dan saviour shue,
    Fo rivasou dinks fo wronb, dan sivorau slube,
    M’i stimoseme clabk, ro yrag, dan mesetimos erd,
    Lou’ly syrule dnif em otu morf thaw vi’e aids,
    Noe throe thin ot dia ouy ni oury suges,
    Wotthiu em tubs ’aye elfs weer laveluses.


16

What two words, of eight letters each, one an adjective, the other a
verb, will exactly resolve themselves into each other?


17

Take five from five, and in its place put twice five hundred and fifty.
What musical instrument will it name?

[Illustration]


18

  H I knees.


19

THE SILVER PUZZLE.

Lay a ten-cent piece upon the table-cloth, between two half-dollars, and
place a tumbler upon the larger coins, The puzzle is to remove the
ten-cent piece without displacing either of the half-dollars, or the
glass. You are not allowed to _touch_ the ten-cent piece, either with
your hands or anything else, nor must you blow it away!


20

A RIDDLE WITHIN A RIDDLE.

    Moce ye unigieson nose, hist dilerd suesg,
    Ti si ton cufidlift, ouy liwl socfens;
    Thaw si hatt burmen--hiwhc fi ouy ivdedi,
    Ouy hent liwl hington veale no theire dies?

[Illustration]


21

    W fowl one testament negative,
      twice one tin vessel negative quarrel.


22

TWO DISJOINTED PROVERBS.

  A great many of our difficulties    may be   dissimulation
  by assiduity and proper diligence.   come    mischief lurks.


23

THE DOG PUZZLE.

[Illustration]

Add four lines to these apparently dead dogs, which shall give them the
appearance of running away.


24

Find a word containing six letters, or less, and out of it produce all
the parts of speech.


25

Find a word which contains the five vowels, each vowel being used but
once.

[Illustration]


26

I am a word of five letters. My _first_ minus my _fifth_ will leave my
_second_; my fifth divided by my first will produce my _fourth_; and
five times my first added to five times my fifth will make my _third_;
my _whole_ is funny.


27

    I contain just five hundred and fifty,
      And also one hundred and nought,
    If the numbers are rightly disposed,
      You’ll obtain just the number you sought;
    You will find I’m a portion of earth,
      Though perhaps on the map I’m not named,
    Yet the deep-sounding sea gave me birth,
      At my feet there’s a river far-famed.


28

[Illustration: Ear long(?)] [Illustration: X specked] [Illustration: A
(great) overturning] [Illustration: and uprising in U rope]


29

    One thousand five hundred divided by one,
    Will express what a lamp is, compared with the sun.

[Illustration]


30

    First make a full circle, then turn to the right,
    And a monarch of old will appear in sight.


31

    Ey recvel wingkon nose, dare em gathir,
    Dan grinb ym bustle namegin tino thilg,
    Wi’llt eden mose catineep, seepcraveren, catt,
    Ot est ym coldisatosin: sha’tt a caft.


32

Out of what two words (comprising ten letters in all) can you get the
eight personal pronouns?


33

SHAKSPERIAN PUZZLE.

[Illustration: KIND.]

You will observe that the D is not quite perfect. There is a little
notch in it. The answer is found in Hamlet.

[Illustration]


34

OLD ENGLISH EPITAPH.

  S To pread E. R. he reand D. E. ignt,
  O LOO KONO
  new it H. out anam E. Ne’e rent
  ER Din theam plebo
  O K
  Off or tune or off AME.


35

N always place not on money-drawer a future day w an article of dress
tin cup insect d ½ of 2 present time.


36

Get a piece of writing-paper, and cut the pattern of a miniature
horse-shoe: divide the figure into six pieces, by _only two straight
cuts with a pair of scissors_. The paper must not be bent or creased.


37

Find the original word of eight letters in which each separate word of
the following sentence may be found.

“A rare chase! See, he reaches her. Ah! she has her cares, her ear
aches.”


38

A MARST PEERTEAR.

    Rices viaSly ot a neverred Dnea,
    Thaw nosear anc eb vigen,
    Scein rageimar si a hoyl gnhit;
    Hatt rheet si onen in nehave?
    Heert ear on nowme, eh deplier,
    Hes cuqik turners het stej
    Menow heert ear, tub m’ I drafia
    Hyet noctan dnif a stripe!


39

                       654                              421
  [Illustration: hand] 321 is that [Illustration: hand]   2 does.
                       ---                              ---
                       333                              842


40

Des two things matching one another, blunts definite article, edge of
tavern powdered earth a grain.


41

Purchase for obtain repleteness of tavern men impaneled to weigh
evidence, we exhibit sixty minutes selves one more exalted twice one
them.

[Illustration]


42

There are more than twenty-nine different articles in my garden, each of
which is a family surname. Who will name them?


43

I am a verb, a small word of six letters; something that every one
should strive to do. But I am a very comprehensive little word, for in
me may be found--

   1. An entreaty.
   2. A vendue.
   3. A vegetable.
   4. A vital principle.
   5. A spring.
   6. A “restorer.”
   7. A stamp.
   8. A contract.
   9. A nautical term.
  10. A body of water.
  11. To perceive.
  12. Rest.

[Illustration]


44

A boy having some marbles, wished to divide them with his companions: he
gave half of them to one boy, who returned him 8; half of them to
another boy, who returned him 4; three quarters of them to another boy,
who returned him 4; he had 8 left: how many had he at first?


45

What two letters of the alphabet will express the name of a river in one
of the Southern States?


46

What letter of the alphabet expresses the joining together of two
States?


47

What word is that of five letters, which, if the two first letters are
taken away, leaves only one?


[Illustration: LABYRINTH NO. 1.

This Labyrinth may be entered by any of the openings in the margin: the
puzzle is, to trace a way to the center without crossing any of the
lines.]


CHARADES.

[Illustration]


1

    My first is the name of a fowl,
      An emblem of modesty known;
    My second has coloring power,
      And grows ’neath a tropical sun.

    My third is a mourning array,
      That’s worn in an Orient clime,
    And reminds of those regions of day
      Beyond the confines of time.

    My fourth in the spring-time is gay,
      And comes with the note of the bird;
    In autumn, leaves forest and spray,
      And goes when no music is heard.

    My fifth takes the place of my fourth,
      When leaves are in autumn time sere;
    But when winter comes on, with its dearth,
      This too will in turn disappear.

    My sixth is a fruit of one zone,
      And name of a prince who sped
    In triumph to England’s proud throne,
      In place of a king who had fled.

    My seventh’s in the meteor’s blaze
      That lights up the star-spangled sky,
    And glows in the twilight’s maze,
      And the clouds in their golden dye.

    My whole in beauty far outvies
      The richest robe a prince e’er wore,
    A signet gleaming in the skies,
      A covenant for evermore.


2

    My first oft preys upon my second;
    My whole a bitter shrub is reckoned.


3

    My first and last are just the same,
      And would you know my second,
    ’Mong children’s first abbreviates
      You’ll oftenest find it reckoned.
    My first and last are always seen,
      A common preposition,
    And here methinks they love to meet
      For _tasteful_ coalition.
    My second, infants spell the word,
      Ere they can lisp another;
    ’Tis name of one still dearer far
      Than sister or than brother.

    My whole, a luscious, pulpy fruit,
      In garden oft found growing,
    Is either with a yellow dress,
      Or richest red robe glowing.
    ’Tis in its prime, when wheat and rye
      Are ripening for the sickle,
    And ready then for present use,
      Or yet to dry and pickle.
    Few fruits in our cold northern clime,
      Than this is more inviting;
    You surely know its name, even while
      Its praises I’m reciting.

[Illustration]


4

        My first is the chief of delights
          That boys from their cradles desire;
        Its shrill crack more musical far
          To them than Apollo’s sweet lyre,
    Except when applied with masterly art,
    To root out the evil that lurks in the heart.

        My second the Bible commends
          To the rich, the wise, and the great,
        With eloquence pleadeth their cause,
          And blesseth their lowly estate;
    They are ever with us, without search are found,
    The more we give to them, the more we abound.

        When the rich man lies down in the grave,
          He takes not his riches away,
        And anxious expectants cluster around,
          To hear what my third has to say:
    Its mandate is law, and if it sore pinches
    The fawning false friend, then vainly he flinches.

        My whole is a sombre brown bird,
          That sadly each night trills his lay;
        And each passer-by stops to hear
          What this bird of eve has to say.
    As ever he sings the same plaintive song,
    Who that has e’er heard him will guess on this long?


5

    My first, although not giving grace
      To ev’ry living creature,
    Is yet upon the human face,
      A most important feature.

    On some it has a classic mien,
      Fair Grecian or bold Roman;
    On some ’tis flat, on some I ween
      ’Twould answer for a gnomon!

    The water fowl which swims the pond,
      Or bathes in ocean briny,
    The dove that coos her ditty fond,
      My first doth have, yet tiny.

    My second is a vowel plain;
      My third an exclamation,
    Upon the music scale again
      It holdeth goodly station.

    My whole, ah, look in yonder sky,
      And you will see it gleaming,
    Less clear, perchance, because more shy,
      Than stars so brilliant beaming.

    The telescope will make how bright
      Its timid, shrinking beauties!
    And bring to mortal ken, the light
      Of its revolving duties.


6

    Awake, idle sleeper. Up! up! and arise,
    Already my first hath made vocal the skies.
    Arouse thee! arouse thee! mount horse, and away;
    For long is the journey before thee to-day.

    Forget not my second, when weary thy steed,
    By that shalt thou urge on his lingering speed
    For many a forest and ford must be passed,
    Before thou shalt reach thine own cottage, at last.

    And ere though thine own cottage garden thou’lt tread,
    The dews of the night on my whole shall be shed,
    On my beautiful whole, yet less blue and less bright,
    Than the eyes which will meet thee with glistening delight.


7

    My _first_ in kingdoms you will find
      Where sovereigns great have reign;
    My _second_ on the Atlantic see,
      When brave hearts cross the main.

    My _whole_, an ally strong and bold
      Of a United State,
    If on the map you think to find,
      Some time you’ll have to wait.

[Illustration]


8

    When night-winds whistle o’er the plain,
      And howls the storm in many a burst,
    How cheering to the way-worn swain
      To seek the shelter of my first!

    With cunning shining in his face,
      From eyes so watchful, keen, and dark,
    The scion of a remnant race--
      My artful second you may mark.

    My third in bearded front arrayed,
      With Autumn’s golden stores is found;
    Yet torn, and bruised, and lowly laid,
      Its head must rest upon the ground.

    My whole you always must forgive,
      As you expect to be forgiven;
    Nor must it in your memory live,
      Though multiplied to seven times seven.


9

    I stand on my first, on my second I sit,
    On my whole I do either just as I think fit.


10

    _First._

    Mantling the ruined wall
    With my green, yielding pall;
        You know me well.
    Covering the river’s brink,
    ’Neath your soft tread I sink.
        My name pray tell.

    _Second._

    Fairest of earthly flowers,
    Queen of your garden bowers,
        Flora’s delight,
    Twined o’er the cottage door,
    My showers of incense pour
        On the still nights.

    _Whole._

    See, when the blushing bride
    Casts her rich vail aside,
        I’m nestled there,
    Near some soft, waving tress,
    Or on her bridal dress,
        Shining so fair.

    Oft on the mourner’s tomb
    Drooping and sad I bloom,
        Token of love
    Left by the orphaned child,
    Calling in accents wild
        For those above.


11

My first is a short sleep. My second is a relation. My whole is an
article in daily use.

[Illustration]


12

    My first belongs, in pairs, to man and beast,
    And of the gifts of harvest not the least;
    The treasures of my next no boy of feeling
    Will e’er disgrace his heart or name by stealing;
    My first and third the time, my whole the way,
    To undertake the duties of each day.


13

    My first is a body of water.
    My second is a fish.
    My third is a preposition.
    My fourth is a name for the head.
    My whole was a bone of contention.


14

    Did’st ever go to singing-school,
      And hear the master try
    To sound the notes upon the scale,
      From lowest to most high?
    Then have you heard my first, the best,
      Fall sweetly on your ear,
    ’Tis strange that with such company
      My second should appear.

    My second ne’er in gentle mood,
      Is full of ire and hate,
    Oh, let none who shall glance this o’er,
      Be found in such a state.
    ’Tis only for the lunatic,
      Bereft of reason’s light,
    Thus to profane his nature by
      So sorrowful a sight.

    My whole is an illusion vain,
      Yet perfect as untrue;
    It doth the real object seem,
      But double on the view.
    By its strange spell the water seems
      As if ’twere hung in air,
    The desert traveler knows full well
      Its vision false as fair.


15

    My first is one, ’tis even you,
      My whole by many have been reckoned,
    But only He who numbers all
      Can ever rightly count my second.


16

    My first is an article in daily use.
    My second spells the twentieth letter of the alphabet.
    My third, if you prefix the letters, will name a declivity.
    My whole is an animal.

[Illustration]


17

    My first is a part of the human face.
    My second is an unpleasant sensation.
    My third is an article.
    My whole is a small animal.


18

    My first is found in every bog,
      In every pool and pond,
    Without me not a single frog
      Or toad could e’er be found.
    My next is _always_ to be found
      Wherever men exist;
    I build their houses, plow their ground,
      And help them to subsist.
    With dread the superstitious soul
    Will speculate upon my whole.


19

    Entire, I’m water, earth, or air,
      I’m food, or clothes, or light,
    Always provided, lady fair,
      That these are used aright.

    And though in fifty things I stay,
      This you will surely find,
    Come in whatever form I may,
      I benefit mankind.

    Two syllables I do possess,
      But what is very droll,
    Although a _part_ my second is,
      My first one is the _whole_.


20

    My first is always on a par
      With every earthly thing;
    With reptile, brute, bird, fish, and man,
      With beggar, priest, and king.

    My second is a title--
      A foreign one, ’tis true--
    But none the less familiar
      To every one of you.

    My whole--a glorious revenge!
      And Heaven’s kindest boon:
    I dare not tell you plainer, lest
      You find me out too soon.


21

My first is what young ladies aim at in their movements, and what
Christians pray for.

My second is what in winter we see little of, and what no young man
likes to be considered.

My third is what every woman should be before she is won, and what we
should be badly off without during this cold weather.

My whole is the name of an authoress, highly popular with both old and
young.

[Illustration]


22

    My _first_, from the frozen North comes down
      In snowy mantle dressed;
    And the smiling earth grows bare and brown,
      Where’er his steps have pressed,
    The flowers close up each sparkling eye,
    And hide in the earth till he passes by.

    But when bleak winds and frosts are gone,
      ’Mid April’s smiles and tears,
    My _second’s_ hue the earth puts on,
      And summer beauty wears;
    And tuneful birds and opening flowers
    Invite you to the forest bowers.

    On moss-grown banks, half hidden there,
      My whole may oft be seen;
    My fragrant leaves perfume the air,
      And shine in emerald green;
    And there my crimson berry glows,
    Ripened beneath New England snows.


23

    _My first._

    The boy who, trusting in his father’s word,
      Sprang from the towering mast to meet the wave,
    Possessed in me the pledge that risk incurred,
      Was equaled by that father’s power to save.

    _My second._

    The nation scourged, dispersed through every land,
      For many ages, wanderers without home,
    In me waits patiently the guiding hand
      Will lead its pilgrims back no more to roam.

    _My third._

    The mother standing at the judgment seat,
      When wisdom’s voice to death her babe did give,
    Resigned to me her claim--willing to meet
      Her loss, so that her precious child might live.
    Through me the tongue of slander lulls its voice,
      Through me the poor have full provision given;
    I lift the fallen one, bid hearts rejoice;
      I bid the poor of earth seek wealth in heaven.

    _My whole._

      A jeweled diadem of priceless worth,
      I quench the luster of all crowns on earth.


24

    My first in gardens oft is seen,
      And oft adorns the bride;
    In early spring its leaves are green--
      It is the maiden’s pride.

    My second thou repeatest
      Full oft in fireside games:
    As sweet, if not the sweetest,
      Of all familiar names.

    A flow’ring shrub, in a distant clime,
      My whole in beauty grows;
    It grew by the sea in olden time,
      And thus its name arose.


25

    Awake, my first, with thy inspiring tone,
    Behold an instrument joy calls his own,
    And with responsive foot, on dewy meads,
    The sylvan dance of fawn and wood nymph leads.

    My next adorns the noble Latin tongue,
    Whose numbers flow sonorous, smooth, and strong;
    There, should you fail to find the word, perchance
    ’Twill greet you in the livelier tones of France.

    My whole, a fragrant flower--’tis not for me
    To eulogize its grace and modesty;
    Full oft the poet’s reed hath breathed its fame,
    In loftier measures--can’st thou tell its name?

[Illustration]


26

    In stillness of midnight, the cry of my first
    On ear of the sleeper affrighted will burst;
    The bells peal their loudest each moment of time,
    As if life depended on even one chime.
    Oh, then is my first in his terror arrayed,
    When anger burns fiercely, he may not be stayed.
    Again round the hearth-stone are happy hearts met,
    From gray-headed sire to the lisping young pet.
    The flame doth grow warmer, and brighter the light;
    How cheering it maketh the winter’s cold night!
    So changeth my first, as the hawk to the dove,
    His aspect is here one of comfort and love.

    My second, bound neither to inland or coast,
    Is one ’mong the many, a numberless host;
    Full transient his being; he cometh in spring,
    And chill winds of autumn his requiem sing.
    Though said to be useful, I frankly confess,
    My wish has been often his music were less.
    Though peaceful his temper, I can not deny
    That rarely by nature he’s suffered to die.
    A foe doth he find in the duster and brush,
    E’en flowerets allure, his existence to crush;
    Like warfare with bodkin Domitian begun,
    Hence gathering much of the fame which he won.

    My whole doth love best to be out in the night,
    And flatters himself on his furnishing light;
    Dear Luna is nothing of comfort to him,
    For brighter his glory when hers is most dim.
    Two lamps he doth carry, and brilliant they are,
    As beams which were stolen from eye of a star.
    His joy is to frisk from the sunset to dawn;
    When morn comes, the pride of his beauty is gone!
    In tropical climates he oft’nest doth dwell,
    He lighteth the savage--hast never heard tell?
    ’Tis growing quite dark; oh, I wish he were nigh;
    Perchance he would give me his lamps to see by.


27

My first is equality, my second inferiority, and my whole superiority.


28

I am composed of nine letters.

My first is a name appropriated to a certain class of foreigners. It is
also a nickname.

My second is an article.

My third implies motion.

My fourth in sound implies proximity.

My fifth is a vowel.

My whole is a part of the Western hemisphere.


29

    When round the weary traveler
      The stormy evening closes,
    When tangled wood or swelling stream
      His toilsome way opposes;
    If through the trees his eager steps
      To rest and warmth are beckoned,
    How gladly will he hail my first,
      That leads him to my second!

    When from some hill’s commanding brow
      The gloomy prospect viewing,
    He hears the distant ocean rage,
      Waves, frightened waves pursuing,
    How gladly turns he to my whole,
      In watch serene abiding,
    And fears no more to think of those
      Who trust my faithful guiding.


30

    Till winter takes his stormy seat,
    In fragrant meads and gardens sweet
        Evolves my viscid _first_;
    When stilly night, with fleecy cloud
    Flings round the earth a darksome shroud,
        My _second_ often beams;--

    O would you each enjoy my _whole_,
    And have true bliss pervade your soul
        And from your eyes outburst--
    Some loving one make haste to find,
    Let Hymen close your spirits bind,
        And learn just how it seems!

[Illustration]


31

    My first is a timid and gentle creature,
      Restless and bright her glancing eye,
    Quick to discern the approach of danger,
      Swift from her covert to spring and fly.
    Oft in the cool of the dewy morning,
      Startled amid her calm retreat,
    She heareth the shrill-toned sound of warning,
      And bounds away on frantic feet,
    While close her fierce pursuers follow,
    Through brush and brake, o’er hill and hollow.

    My second telleth of holy seasons,
      And calleth the multitude to prayers;
    On festivals speaketh right joyously,
      When all a face of gladness wears;
    Having at times, too, a voice of sorrow,
      Speaking in deep and solemn tone,
    Telling how faithless is false to-morrow,
      To those who weep for the dear ones gone;
    Yet feeling itself nor grief nor gladness,
    Responsive ever to mirth or sadness.

    My whole is a beautiful, modest flower,
      Shaking its bells to the summer wind,
    Peeping out coyly from lonely places,
      Which footsteps of children love to find,
    Dreaming they hear in the purple blossoms
      Fairy-like tones of the olden time:
    Fondly thinking the sweet bells are ringing,
      With a soft, low, musical chime,
    Their golden curls and innocent bosoms,
    They fill with the graceful, drooping blossoms.

[Illustration]


32

    My first is seen in all its pride
    On summer nights when bright and clear,
    O’er hill and dale I beauty throw;
    Night owes me much throughout the year;
    Some say my whole no substance has,
    However plain it may appear;
    I shall not give you further clue,
    No need to one as smart as you;
    Enough, my whole is written here.

[Illustration: LABYRINTH NO. 2.

This Labyrinth must be entered at the front gate, and a way traced to
the centre (A), without climbing the walls.]




RIDDLES.


1

    I have three feet, dear friends,
                      And you must know:
    I’ve sixteen nails,
                      But not a single toe!


2

I am originally a descendant of rags, but, in spite of my mean origin, I
boast one of the most numerous families in the world. I wear the
countenance of a man, varying in complexion from crimson to azure; and
twice two stars are my companions. But, although of such dignity,
besides having my face disfigured, I am continually spit upon, and
trodden under foot by all mankind, who seem to value me only for my good
looks--without them, I am despised. I am diminutive in size, and my days
are few, but I am well known, and constantly sought after.


3

    Who are we? When in the morning you rise
    We let the sunshine down into your eyes.
    Then we go playing before you all day,
    Dark things we brighten, and soften the gay.
    Oh! we make half the world’s beauty for you.
    Little blue-eyed one, who are we? guess who?

    Who are we? When the night shadows grow deep,
    We draw around you the curtains of sleep.
    When into dream-land we’ve locked you up tight,
    Until the morn brings her bright keys of light,
    Guess who like sentinels guarding you lie,--
    Look--we’re before you now--black and gray eye.


4

    I am born of a moment, as every one knows,
    And rival the tints of the loveliest rose;
    There are many who think me the offspring of shame,
    But I’m oftener found in sweet modesty’s train;
    E’en poets have made me the theme of their muse,
    And painters have studied my delicate hues:
    Yet, would you believe it! I cause much vexation
    To those who possess me, and some irritation;
    For I’ve often betrayed what they would have concealed,
    And some of their most-cherished secrets revealed:
    So be truthful, dear girls, or in spite of your tact,
    I’ll fly in your faces and tell the whole fact.


5

    Of metal I can make a heart;
      I put a stop to ease;
    And with a tradesman I can talk
      As glibly as you please.
    With a building in New York I’ll make
      A covering for your head;
    And with the rust upon your knife
      I’ll make a piece of bread.
    I’ll make a prison with old time,
      And with a measure, too:
    Now, Cousins all, say what I am,
      For I belong to you.


6

    I was pure, unsullied, white as snow,
    But a little while ago,
    When, by a tremendous squeeze,
    I was spotted as you please.
    Now, if you but look at me,
    Something funny you will see,
    That I am striped, spotted, white,
    Yet that I am _red_ to-night.

[Illustration]


7

    In Eden first, nigh the forbidden tree,
    Found I my germ, as man his destiny;
    Down in the depths of hell I had my birth;
    I tortures there invented spread o’er Earth.
    The man who strives for Fame’s approving nod,
    I strike him on the face, he lies a clod.
    I walk the public halls, and cheeks turn pale;
    The speaker hears me, and his heart doth fail.

    The young debutant on histrionic boards
    Hath grace or ruin as my mood accords.
    When two great powers (both vital friends of man
    And both his enemies) in battle stand,
    When over, under in their rage they roll;
    Nor ever cease the fight, without control
    Then am I found, and in the expiring sigh
    The vanquished wrestler utters, then I die.


8

    I am always seen in sugar,
      And always seen in salt.
    I am never seen in hops or beer,
      But always seen in malt.
    I’m never seen when it is light,
      Yet, strange, I’m seen in day.
    If you will look right sharp, I’m sure
      You will find me when you stray.
    I am never seen in coffee,
      But always seen in tea.
    I’m never found with mother,
      With father I must be.
    I’m always found with any thing,
      Yet, strange as it may seem,
    I’m never found in buttermilk,
      But always found in cream.
    I’m never found in good or sweet,
      And never in your mind,
    If you will study this right close,
      My name you’ll surely find.


9

    What force or strength can not get through,
    I with a gentle touch can do;
    And many in the street would stand,
    Were I not as a friend at hand.

[Illustration]


10

There is a certain natural production neither animal, vegetable, nor
mineral. It generally exists from two to six feet above the surface of
the earth. It has neither length, breadth, nor substance. It is neither
male nor female, but commonly exists between both. It is often spoken of
in the Old Testament, and strongly recommended in the New; and serves
equally the purposes of treachery and fidelity.


11

I am a word in very common use. You will find me more than once upon
almost or quite every page, whether a monosyllable, or dissyllable, or a
polysyllable is to be found out; but this much is told: my first and
last letter is the same; and my first three and my last three spell the
same word. A useful article this of personal decoration. My interior is
remarkable. Viewed one way, you laugh; viewed another, you sigh. I am an
etymological stumble, and a novice hardly ever knows where to find me.
To a Frenchman and a German I am an abhorrence. They never learn me so
as even to call my name.


12

    In vain you struggle to regain me,
    When lost, you never can obtain me;
    And yet, what’s odd, you sigh and fret,
    Deplore my loss, and have me yet.
    And often using me quite ill,
    And seeking ways your slave to kill--
    Then promising in future you
    Will give to me the homage due.
    Thus we go on from year to year;
    My name pray let the party hear.


13

    I’m swift as a shadow; I’m slow as a snail;
    I fly like the storm-cloud impelled by the gale;
    I sail with the mariner o’er the wide sea,
    And traverse the shore with the bird and the bee.
    I travel by day, and I travel by night,
    And rarely from mortals I pass out of sight.
    I dwell in the palace of nobles and kings,
    But scorn not the cot where the poor mother sings;
    But though I abide with the lowliest poor,
    I ne’er have been turned from the rich man’s door.
    I’m seen in the moon, when it waxes and wanes,
    In the sun, too, at times when nature complains.
    I’m courted much under shady bowers,
    And welcomed at midnight or noonday hours.
    I fly round the world each passing day,
    And yet I’m as idle as a boy at play;
    Nor do I repose at the set of the sun,
    But wing my way by the light of the moon.
    By day and by night I enter the door
    Of high and of low, of rich and of poor;
    And yet with a step so noiseless I come,
    I’m not an intruder abroad or at home.
    All deeds of darkness I ever eschew,
    Though many such deeds I am forced to view
    And now, since so often my features are seen,
    Unless you can guess me, you surely are green.

[Illustration]


14

I was born in the fields; taken from thence at an early age, I was made
to assume my present form, and sold as a slave into the family of a
wealthy merchant. While I was young, and comely, my life was
comparatively easy; the modest Lucy would take me by the hand, and with
her I would roam over the richly-carpeted mansion; and many a service I
have rendered her. One morning, quite early, before the rest of the
family were up, Lucy was standing by the window; I was leaning against
her shoulder, when she uttered a slight scream. I jumped, and came near
falling, but she caught hold of me, and pointing towards the window,
showed me the cause of her terror. One well-aimed blow of mine felled
the intruder to the earth, and the footman coming in just then, gave him
the finishing touch. But, alas! my days of pleasant servitude were
drawing near a close. Lucy became dissatisfied with me, and in a fit of
pique, handed me over to the cook, by whom I was hustled hither and
thither, wherever her fancy dictated. She was a careless woman, and one
day, while I was doing all I could to serve her, she actually pushed me
into the fire! Snatching me out as quickly as possible, she plunged me
into a bucket of cold water; but I was disfigured and crippled for life,
and disabled from further service. The cook at length declared she would
no longer give me house-room, and one bitter cold night, turned me out
into the street, without a stitch of clothing. I have never murmured
when called upon to work; yet here I lie, neglected, unheeded, and
uncared for.

But why should I complain? am I the only one shunned and forsaken, when
no longer able to minister to the wants or pleasures of the world?

[Illustration]


15

    Among the snakes, I reck of one,
      Not born of earthly breed,
    And with this serpent vieth none,
      In terror or in speed.

    It darts upon its helpless prey
      With roar both loud and high;
    In one destruction borne away,
      Rider and steed must die.

    In highest place it loves to bide,
      No door may bar its path,
    And scaly armor’s iron pride
      Will but attract its wrath.

    The firmest earth it plows amain,
      How tough soe’er it be--
    As brittle reeds are snapt in twain
      ’Twill rend the mightiest tree.

    Yet hath this monster, grim and fierce,
      Ne’er twice with prey been fed,
    But once its fiery tooth can pierce--
      It slayeth--and is dead.




REBUSES.


1

    A letter prefix to the tyrant’s delight,
    You’ll see a kind friend on a cold winter’s night.


2

My first may be divided into three parts. It may belong to one of the
senses; it may be almost a lake; or it may represent 100.

My second may likewise be divided into three parts. It may have
something to do with myself; it may be a part of myself; or it may
represent 1.

My third may be divided into two parts. It may be either a river, or
represent 500.

Then 100, 1, and 500 make the answer.

The whole was the title of one who surprised Europe by the brilliancy of
his military exploits.


3

A fragment, an article of dress, a noise, an animal, a fruit, and a part
of the body. The initials of these spell my whole, out of which I hope
you will always keep.


4

    Find me a word which will express the name
    Of feathered biped, found both wild and tame:
    Then take away one letter, and it will
    Express the name of feathered biped still.


5

    Find me a word which shows us at a glance
    A foreign country, farther off than France;
    Then take away one letter, and it will
    Express the name of a foreign country still.

[Illustration]


6

    In an every-day word (with but six letters in it)
      You will find a few things which are worthy attention;
    I will give you a clue, and I think in a minute
      You’ll not find it much trouble those few things to mention.
    Take four of the letters, and if they’re placed rightly,
      They one drop of liquid will bring to your view;
    Cut off the last letter, and then see what nightly
      Is drank by the many, and not by the few.

    Now mix up the letters, and four more take out;
      To make what all animals always possess.
    Many more I could name; but I haven’t a doubt
      You are ready this moment my riddle to guess.
    So the name of the whole, now, is all I require--
    It’s what every woman should always have by her.

[Illustration]


7

Entire I’m a useful quadruped; remove my first, and I become a species
of grain; replace my first, and remove my last, and I am a city famed
for its inquisition.


8

How can you take something from nothing, and leave a number?


9

Entire I am very useful in machines; take away my first letter, and I am
a part of the body; take away my first and second, and I am a species of
snake.


10

Add to an article, in every-day use, a letter, and it becomes another
useful article; with a third letter it becomes a girl’s name, and with a
fourth letter another name; with a fifth letter it becomes an historical
record, and with a sixth letter it is much the same thing, only more
so.

[Illustration]


11

    My first and my second are each like the other,
      (When transposed they have oft proved a curse;)
    My whole sounds most sweetly by sea or by river,
      But at home it is quite the reverse.


12

I am composed of five letters.

My first is the same as my last.

My second is the initial of the name of a very old gardener.

My third you will find in the centre of the largest city in America.

My fourth is the initial of the name of a man that King David used
rather badly.

My fifth is the same as my first.

My whole is two monosyllables that publishers often say to their
subscribers, and like to have them respond to.


13

    Prefix a letter to a Christian name,
    ’Twill spell an attribute that few would claim.

[Illustration]


14

Entire, I am a reptile. Behead me, and I become an article much used by
carpenters. Take away another letter, and I shall not be well.


15

    A part of the hand you transpose right,
    You’ll find it’s what you use at night.


16

Entire I am a vegetable. Cut off my tail, and I am a small insect. Put
on my tail, and take away my third letter, and I am what gamblers often
do.


17

    Forwards, backwards, read my name,
    In sound and meaning I’m the same.
    Infants, on their mother’s knee,
    Often smile at sight of me.
    Add a letter, strange, but true,
    A man I then appear in view.


18

What eight words of four letters will resolve themselves into four
different words each?


19

I am the name of something felt, but never seen. Take away my third
letter, and you have an utensil much used in pastry-cooking. Reverse it,
and you have something quite refreshing on summer afternoons. Take away
my second, and you have a very important article in a lady’s toilet.
Take away my first and third, and you have a rather indefinite article.


20

The name of a great city in Europe.

Transpose, I am an adjective of the comparative degree.

Cut off my last two letters, and reverse, I am a preposition.

Drop my first two letters, I am a pronoun.

Leave out my second letter, and transpose, I am a French word signifying
_sea_.

Drop the first and last two letters, I am an interjection.

Drop my third letter and transpose, I am unrefined metal.


21

Entire I am polite. My fifth multiplied by the sum of my second and
fourth, produces my first. My second and third multiplied by my fifth,
is twice my first.


22

It is a compound word, and belongs to the mineral, and sometimes
vegetable kingdom. The whole word is used to contain the first. There
are six letters in the first, and two vowels. The last word spelled
backward, is a toy that boys play with. The first two letters of the
last word is the name of a river in Europe. The first word spelled
differently, but pronounced the same, is a substance of which an
important article of food is made.

[Illustration]


23

Entire I am a bird. Take away my last two, and I am a bird. Behead me
and cut off my tail, and I signify perpetuity. Cut off my first two, and
I am an exclamation!


24

        Complete, I form a rapid view;
          Behead--a weapon next appears;
        Behead again--transpose--and lo!
          I now excite the truant’s fears.
    ’Tis something strange, and though there be
    Three letters left, but one you see.


25

What city is there, whose name, if transposed, will give you a name
considered very disgraceful in the time of the revolutionary war;
transposed again, you have a term applied to one not very proficient.

[Illustration]


26

    A nice place to stroll in when evenings are fair,
      My letters will make, if arranged with due care;
    But when they’re transposed--Oh! pray, be discreet,
      Nor be reckless in daring my presence to meet.


27

I am a proper name of two syllables.

My first syllable is a place where wild beasts may often be found.

My first syllable backward is a boy’s nickname.

My second syllable backward is the worst thing in the world.


28

    I am but small, yet when entire,
    Enough to set the world on fire.
    Leave out a letter, and ’tis clear
    I can maintain a herd of deer.
    Leave out another, and you’ll find
    I once have saved all human kind.


29

In full dress, I am considered finished; take off my cap, and I am a
number; put on my cap and take off my shoes, and I am a title.


30

    I’m seven letters; and I name
    A man, who does high office claim.
    Decapitate me, and I still
    Survive, you’ll find, a tale to tell;
    Again behead, I tell of gladness;
    Again--I oft am cause of sadness;
    Once more, and still I live to say
    What you, no doubt, did yesterday;
    Beheaded yet once more, I name
    Yourself, in tongue of classic fame;
    At last, of all but one bereft,
    That one a Latin word is left.


31

    Without me man is incomplete,
      A friend I am to you;
    But for my aid I’m very sure
      That little work you’d do.

    But if to what I now possess,
      One letter you should add,
    You’ll see what mischief I can do
      Whene’er my master’s mad.

    And now if you to me should add
      Another letter still,
    ’Twill show what pretty ladies oft
      Can do with me at will.


32

I am something which fishermen use. Behead me, and I become food for
horses. Put on my head and cut off my tail, and I am a large serpent.


33

Entire, I am one drop of liquid; behead me, and I become a part of the
human frame; put on my head and cut off my tail, and I am a plant.

[Illustration]


34

    My whole is what animals always will be
      When tamed by the power of man;
    Transpose me, and then with the farmer I’ll be,
      When plowing the field with his span.

    Again if transposed, on the table I’m placed,
      When at supper he goes home at night;
    And (if he is married) transpose me again,
      I’m sitting, perhaps, on his right.


35

I am a pronominal adjective; behead me and I am personal pronoun; again
behead me and I am a verb.


36

    Three letters there are which may be so arranged,
      That three things they can spell you with care,
    A nickname quite common,--what all things must have,--
      And the home of the lion or bear.


37

    My whole is a name that belongs to some men,
      And is short, if ’tis not very sweet;
    Transpose me, and now on the fair sex I’m seen,
      When they’re taking a walk in the street.

    Transpose me again, and a verb I become,
      Which boys must all do to be men;
    A third time transpose me, ah! shun me, and run,
      For wretched and sinful I’m then.


38

    Pray, discover a part of the human frame,
      Which divided, another will make,
    A member, whose function is also made known,
      If the letters you rightly shall take:
    Again, it will show what another one does,
      And that which is made by a third,
    But each of these members return to my whole,
      (When transposed), which no doubt you have heard.


39

Unbroken I am a term sometimes applied to the atmosphere; remove my
first, and I am a king famed in tragedy; remove my first and second, I
am a part of the human body; remove my first, second, and third, and I
am a city mentioned in the Bible; remove my first and last, and I am an
inclosure.


40

    Entire I’m false as false can be,
      And every one should doubt me,
    But without hat and wig, you’ll see,
      There’s nothing false about me.

[Illustration]


41

What preposition by prefixing a letter is what we do every day; by
prefixing another, is what we have in summer; by prefixing yet another,
is a kind of grain?


42

    My whole is in cottage, and palace, and hall,
    And is constantly used by the great and the small,
    Beheaded, it still is attached to a head,
    And of various colors, black, brown, white, or red.
    Behead it again, and all heads would lie low,
    If deprived of its aid, as you probably know.


43

    One, two, three, four, are all the same in sound,
    Whatever difference in their sense is found;
    My number one was once performed, you’ll say,
    For some you honor, on a joyful day.
    For number two each claims that he contends,
    Who fights another, or himself defends.
    My number three is something I can do,
    And hope the same may be affirmed of you.
    A man of handicraft is number four.
    Now, if you know them all, I’ll say no more.


44

Entire I often cause great pain; beheaded I am boisterous; curtailed you
see a heathen deity; transposed I describe a course.

[Illustration]


45

What wicked deed is that which, read backward, gives what is generally
the cause of it?


46

    To a place where the living did all once reside,
    Add fifty--be sure that ’tis on the right side;
    You will then see a name which you’ll find to belong
    To a songster that’s famed for melodious song.


47

What two consonants and one vowel can be so arranged as to spell the
name of an animal, a name applied to a particular class of men, and a
word expressing human ability?


48

    Entire, I’m considered rude by some,
    Behead me, and a weed I then become,
    Exchange my head, and then there will be seen
    An animal that boundeth on the green.

    Again, if of my head I am bereft,
    A verb is all that you’ll discover left;
    Transpose me now, an organ I shall be,
    That very oft in churches you may see.

[Illustration]


49

    I am found on the deep where the gallant ship sails,
      Transpose me, I’m perhaps in the hold;
    Transpose me again, with the cargo I’m placed,
      ’Mongst the goods which the artist has sold.

                Now change me again,
                  And the Bible will say
                How I guided the mariner
                  Safe on his way.


50

I am a word of evil import. Without my hat I am almost as bad; place my
wig at my feet, I am no better; my last two letters make me slightly
ill, and with my second, fourth, and fifth letters transposed, I am
utterly false.


51

    A strong desire to gain my whole
      Has many a politician made,
    More than a yearning in the soul,
      With love of country, I’m afraid;
    One letter less, and now on me
      The ladies cast their longing eyes,
    Hundreds of dollars, recklessly,
      Are spent for me, which is not wise.
    Of one more letter now bereft,
      (’Tis no more strange than true),
    You’ll find exactly one is left,
      Yet, ’tis three fifths of two.


52

    When spelled with four letters, I’m solemn, ’tis true;
    But spell me in five, and you’ll know what I do.
    Even change two of these, and no wrong you will find,
    And in six, I’ll build wagon or house to your mind.


53

    Curtail me once, I am a youth;
      Behead me once, a snake;
    Complete I’m often used in truth
      When certain steps you take.


54

    Four letters, just, compose my name,
    Read forward, backward, both the same
            Will readily appear;
    A Prophetess, I stand confess’d,
    Who once the Mediator bless’d,
            With reverential fear.


55

    A bird and a sheep, and a yard and a quarter,
      An organ of very great use, I am sure,
      And the very beginning of literature,
    Are the name of many a gentleman’s daughter.

[Illustration]


56

    Ah! wo to him who feels my power!
      A grasping, clutching thing am I,
    And many, in some evil hour,
      Have, by my means, been called to die.

    Remove my head, and scarcely less
      Will be the mischief that I make;
    Beware of both, for I confess
      That either will insure an ache.


57

    Cut off my head and singular I am;
    Cut off my tail and plural I appear;
    Cut off both head and tail, and strange to say,
    Although my middle’s left, there’s nothing there!
    What is my head cut off? A sounding sea.
    What is my tail cut off? A roaring river,
    Beneath whose placid waves I peaceful play,
    The parent of soft sounds, though mute forever.

[Illustration]


58

It is a compound word, calling to mind social pleasures. The subject of
a pretty Scotch song, and the place in the family most missed by the
absent. The first four letters form the name of a cruel master. Take my
second, third, and fourth, and it is a wicked passion. The last four
letters form a part of the animal body. Put the fifth letter after the
last three, and you will see a term used among the ancient Romans in
regard to time. Transpose the first four, and it means _prevailing_.
Transpose the last three, and, as a noun, it is anxiously watched by the
gambler; and, as a verb, puts an end to earthly joys and sorrows. Remove
the third letter, and the first, second, and fourth is an exclamation.


59

I am something very beautiful, which you can look at, but never touch:
spell me backward, and I do a great deal of mischief.


60

Entire I am a pronoun in the second person. Take away my first letter,
and I am a pronoun still, but in the first person; put on my first, and
take away my last letter, and I am again a pronoun in the second
person.




ENIGMAS

[Illustration]


1

ASTRONOMICAL ENIGMA.

I am composed of twenty letters.

My 1, 2, 6, 7, is a star in the constellation Cetus.

My 6, 15, 10, 12, 3, is one of the signs of the Zodiac.

My 11, 6, 8, 4, is a star in Argo Navio.

My 6, 20, 13, 19, 11, 6, is a star in Gemina.

My 1, 6, 7, 16, 10, 5, is a star in Serpentarino.

My 1, 12, 15, 6, 17, 18, is a star in Andromeda.

My 9, 14, 8, is one of the constellations.

My whole is the name of one who rendered Astronomy no inconsiderable
aid.


2

I am composed of 24 letters.

My 8, 3, 9, 21, is an accumulation.

My 16, 9, 1, 14, 23, is a machine.

My 2, 5, 4, 22, is a dear place.

My 6, 5, 5, 18, 11, 17, 6, is of the fowl species.

My 10, 7, 9, 1, is a resting-place.

My 21, 12, 9, 13, is a sort of turf.

My 19, 11, 15, 9, 4, is a vapor.

My 20, 3, 15, 24, is a germinating article.

My whole is an old proverb.


3

I am composed of seventeen letters.

My 14, 3, 10, is a weight.

My 6, 11, 4, 13, 15, is a place of abode.

My 2, 16, 8, 14, is to stop.

My 12, 15, 10, 1, is a part of an encampment.

My 5, 7, 17, 9, is a product of the sea.

My whole is a part of the decalogue.


4

I am composed of ten letters.

My 1, 2, 7, is an animal.

My 6, 5, 10, 7, most birds have.

My 1, 2, 3, 7, is a vehicle.

My 4, 8, 6, is a place where hogs are kept.

My 1, 2, 9, 4, 8, 7, is a kind of covering.

A class of mechanics expresses my whole.


5

I am composed of seven letters.

My 6, 7, 4, was used in war.

My 6, 4, 5, 2, 3, 1, is a seat of war.

My 2, 7, 4, 3, is a useful animal.

My whole is loved by every true-hearted American.

[Illustration]


6

My 4, 2, 7, 10, is a planet, a chemical combination, and a town.

My 23, 10, 1, 14, 4, 21, 16, 15, was a witty French writer.

My 17, 16, 8, 19, 18, 1, 6, 18, 12, 20, 23, 7, is a little watchman, who
always carries his lamp with him.

Divine honors were paid by an ancient eastern nation to the 22, 1, 3,
11.

My 11, 6, 23, 14, is a title.

Nature herself inspired the pencil of 9, 13, 21, 2, 5, 14, 8, 20, 4, 4,
20, 14.

My 9, 21, 23, 14, is a part of the inheritance of man.

My whole is a pleasant, but rather profitless occupation, which you can
express in 23 letters.

[Illustration]


7

Two boys, one named 25, 13, 24, 19, 17, 15, and the other 6, 20, 21, 7,
8, 27, went to 27, 14, 17 their uncle 7---- one 15, 4, 13, 6, 14, 19. He
had 6, 15, 21 fine 20, 21, 3, 5, 14, 9, but he forbid the 22, 8, 12, 27
to 19, 4, 24, 17, without his 1, 21, 13, 9, 14, 11, 6. But master 6. was
a 1, 8, 3, 14, 22, 17, 5, 5 and 15, 4, 22, 24 boy, but his brother 25.
was obedient to his uncle’s 15, 4, 27, 2, 14, 9. One 12, 10, 16, master
6. said to his brother, “Let’s 27, 8, 12, 12, 22, 14 the 20, 21, 19, 9,
17, 27, for we have a fine 1, 2, 10, 11, 1, 17. Uncle has gone to 6, 21,
15, 13.” “11, 21, indeed,” answered 7, 25, 27, 6, 14, 19, 25.; “20, 21,
15 can you 12, 21 what you 9, 18, 26? Has not uncle forbid us to 19, 23,
12, 17 them?” But master 6. did not 10, 6, 6, 14, 13, 24 to what his
brother said. He took 21, 13, 17 of the 20, 21, 3, 5, 14, 27 and 19, 21,
24, 14--2, 23, 7, but was 6, 2, 3, 21, 15, 11 and severely hurt, and
having disregarded his uncle’s 1, 21, 7, 7, 8, 11, 24, 27, he 22, 21, 9,
6 his good opinion and 22, 10, 26--23, 22, 22 for 6, 2, 19, 14, 14
weeks, and during the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

[Illustration]


8

I am composed of 22 letters.

My 14, 16, 10, 7, was the founder of Kentucky.

My 11, 13, 16, 4, 8, 19, 1, is the Empire State of the South.

My 18, 3, 7, 6, 12, the cause of the late panic.

My 1, 15, 17, 6, 4, 21, 15, what young ladies love to be.

My 17, 10, 9, 21, 22, 20, what they ought to be.

My 2, 1, 20 is an animal.

My whole is a familiar proverb.


9

I am composed of 21 letters.

My 3, 2, 12, 16, is a fixed principle in the art of fencing.

My 13, 4, 10, 8, is a beverage.

My 19, 5, 7, 1, 16, is what nobody would wish to lose.

My 15, 20, 6, 16, 14, 8, is a relation.

My 17, 9, 21, 10, are animals.

My 18, 6, 14, is a great ally of experience.

My 11, 20, 7, is a fruit.

My whole is a proverb.


10

I am composed of 27 letters.

My 3, 23, 20, 22, 9, 17, was the name of a celebrated Egyptian.

My 2, 7, 15, 9, 26, 10, was the name of an ambitious Roman, who was
elected Consul six times.

My 8, 26, 17, 22, 14, 19, was the name of a man who was a great favorite
with Queen Elizabeth.

My 13, 9, 8, 7, was the name of a Latin poet, born in 1470, died 1566.

My 8, 1, 24, 12, 6, 22, 16, 27, was the name of a Sicilian, who learned
a lesson from Dionysius.

My 1, 18, 16, 4, 11, 15, 21, 24, 25, 5, 14, was the name of a brave
English general, who received his death wound at the battle of
Alexandria, on the 21st of March, 1801.

My whole is an event which occurred in Henry the Seventh’s reign, and
materially affected the interests of this country.


11

I am composed of 39 letters.

Never be 8, 18, 35, 12, 28, and cruel to the 31, 38, 1, 5, 17, 7, 31,
26, 25, 19, 9, but be 33, 29, 26, 23, 3, 13, and 4, 5, 30, 11, 38, 33;
if 10, 13,--16, 11, 32, 3, we may relieve, 36, 34, 38, 39 a 12, 2, 22,
21,--20, 15, 37,17, 27, by a mere 12, 24, 2, 6,--5, 14, sympathy.


12

I am composed of 6 letters.

My 1, 2, 4, is used by all ladies.

My 1, 3, 4, is used by all cooks.

My 1, 3, 2, 4, is felt by all people.

My 4, 2, 1, is understood in a musquito country.

My 4, 3, 1, is interfered with in the same.

My 6, 2, 4, is nearly as old as the world.

My 6, 5, 3, 1, is a valuable ally of the water cure system.

My whole promote much discord in domestic circles.

[Illustration]


13

I am composed of 9 letters.

My 2, 5, 9, is part of a fish.

My 2, 3, 6, is more useful than pleasant to most children.

My 6, 5, 9, is the name of a quadruped.

My 5, 7, 8, is apt to be made light of, by us sinners.

My 2, 7, 1, 9, is a valuable vegetable production.

My whole is a reptile.


14

I am composed of 13 letters.

My 1, 13, 2, is the name of a female animal.

My 2, 5, 6, is a measure of length.

My 3, 4, 13, 6, is a musical instrument

My 8, 13, 7, 6, is a starting-place.

My 9, 12, 13, 5, is an image.

My 11 is a vowel.

My whole is the name of a group of islands in the Pacific Ocean.


15

I am composed of 23 letters.

My 3, 7, 19, 14, is part of a ship.

My 15, 16, 17, 18, 1, is what Eve was.

My 9, 2, 5, is a relation.

My 12, 10, 22, 23, 13, is a piece of poetry.

My 20, 21, 4, 11, is one drop of liquid.

My 6, 18, 8, 13, is a kind of wood.

My whole is a proverb.


16

A 27, 11, 22, 29, 24, 13 severely 27, 2, 28, 26, 12, 10, 30 by 9, 6, 11,
2, 8, 5, seeing a 1, 17, 4, 12, 21 of 18, 7, 15, 10, 2--27, 7, 11, 13,
15, 29, 25 on a 21, 11, 22, 13, supposed it to be 2, 10, 7, 17; 8,
24--30, 16, 26, 6, 11, 13, 1--30, 14, 18, 13--7, 5, it with all her
might she struck against the board, and, breaking her 18, 11, 13, 22,
fell 6, 3, 17, 27, 17, 10, 8, 21, 17, 20 to the 3, 19, 2, 9, 6--18, 6,
28, 2, 29. She was quickly taken by 23, 13, 10 of the 27, 4, 12, 26, 29,
2, 8 by. And must have thought 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.


17

I am composed of 25 letters.

My 24, 14, 3, 2, 6, 12, was a distinguished Latin writer

My 16, 25, 24, 7, 23, 21, 6, 9, 5, is a class in Botany.

My 10, 15, 17, 9, 16, 7, is a lake in New York.

My 3, 5, 11, 8, 10, 20, is a city in China.

My 4, 9, 11, 24, 12, 4, 15, is a county in Kentucky.

My 1, 12, 8, 8, 25, 6, 19, 4, is a silly bird.

My 13, 4, 10, 6, 25, 20, 3, 19, is a city in Italy.

My 23, 7, 18, 10, 4, 22, 12, 20, was the name of a conqueror.

My whole is a document which first saw the light many years ago.

[Illustration: LABYRINTH NO. 3.

Go in at the front entrance and travel along the roads until you reach
the dwelling-house in the centre.

Be particular not to get over any of the fences.]




ACROSTICS.

[Illustration]


1

A valuable ally of family sociability, and what pertains to it.

1. A species of garment.

2. An ancient French coin.

3. One of the Ladrone Islands.

4. An insect.

5. A man’s name.

[Illustration]


2

A beautiful creature, and where it is often seen.

1. A ferry-boat.

2. A town in New York.

3. An emblem of poverty.

4. An emblem of gentleness.


3

    First call to mind a nymph of paradise,
    Next where the poet, Ovid, buried lies;
    A sect religious, most in Persia seen;
    A title given to Juno, goddess-queen;
    A town in England, famous for the death
    Of two crowned kings, and Queen Elizabeth.
    The letters first of these will give the name
    Of ancient poet, great has been his fame:
    The final letters--if you careful note--
    Will tell you of a poem which he wrote.


4

A fruit, and where it grows.

1. A division.

2. Where the lion sleeps.

3. A Russian proclamation.

4. A spice.


5

The promoter of much discord in a family, and its ally.

1. A pet name for an animal.

2. A person whose mental capabilities would never fit him for a Senator.

3. A river in Europe.

4. A Roman emperor.

5. A bird.


6

A token and its receptacle.

1. Is of long continuance.

2. A beautiful tree.

3. Was a king of Thrace.

4. A flower named after a goddess.


7

A place for vessels, and a liquor.

1. An important part of a church.

2. A large river in Asia.

3. A gambler’s gain.

4. A mighty conqueror.


8

A useful token, and what supports it.

1. What every tree should have.

2. A county in Minnesota.

3. Something very common in summer.

4. Something found on every wagon.


9

Stalks, and a fruit.

1. A wound.

2. A member of the human body.

3. A wanderer.

4. A tune.

5. A part of milk.




DECAPITATIONS.


[Illustration: PEACEFUL SLUMBERING ON THE OCEAN.]

1. Behead a noble vessel, and leave a rude one.

2. Behead that which may save life, and leave that which destroys it.

3. Behead every thing, and leave nothing.

4. Behead a weapon, and leave a fruit.

5. Behead a gymnastic feat, and leave that which accomplished it.

6. Behead an uncomfortable situation, and leave what promoted it.

7. Behead an uncultivated idea, and leave those who entertain it.

8. Behead a celebrated British admiral, and leave a British
commander-in-chief and viscount.

9. Behead a primate of Scotland, and leave a consul of the U. S. A. to
Tunis in 1797.

10. Behead an Irish author who wrote a work on Beauty, and leave an able
and intrepid English admiral.

11. Behead an eminent Scotch physician and mathematician, and leave a
learned German professor of Rhetoric.

12. Behead a country, and leave a sensation.

[Illustration]

13. Behead a weapon, and leave a part of speech.

14. Behead a destructive deed, and leave one of mirth.

15. Behead a man, and leave a beverage.

16. Behead a twist, and leave a beverage.

17. Behead a wart, and leave a small horse.

18. Behead a perfume, and leave a coin.

19. Behead a ribbon, and leave an animal.

20. Behead an iron hod, and leave an important character in one of
Dickens’s works.

21. Behead a drove, and leave a means of fastening.

22. Behead a tool, and leave a reptile.

23. Behead a reptile, and leave a tool.

24. Behead mildew, and leave a sunbeam.

[Illustration]

25. Behead a viaduct, and leave the upper part of a slope.

26. Behead a number, and leave a heart.

27. Behead a heart, and leave a metal.

28. Behead a kitchen utensil, and leave a tenement.

    29. Behead a scion of the forest king,
        And straight behold a very barber-ous thing.

    30. Behead a youthful damsel, and you’ll find
        A mate, perchance, more suited to your mind.

    31. Behead a thing in every kitchen seen,
        And what is left will puzzle you, I ween.

    32. Behead an object gaunt, which Superstition dreads,
        And lo! for all your pains, a hundred thousand heads.

    33. Behead what tear-drops did in Beauty’s eyes,
        And leave what Beauty did to cause their rise.

    34. Behead a well-known animal, and see
        Another better known than even he.

    35. Behead an instrument of pleasant tone,
        And leave another one to minstrels known.

    36. Behead a bird, one common as can be,
        And leave one which we not as often see.

    37. And when ye’ve done all this, like clever elves,
        Forever still behead, but leave yourselves.

[Illustration]

38. Behead a lady, and leave a lady.

39. Behead a bird, and leave a vessel.

40. Behead a seed, and leave a grain.

41. Behead what some men love, and leave what most men love.

42. Behead a stream, and leave a bird.

43. Behead a part of a chain, and leave a fluid.

44. Behead a vessel, and leave a part of the body.

45. Behead a grain, and leave a luxury.

46. Behead a band, and leave a catching apparatus.

47. Behead an article used in sewing, and leave a stream.

48. Behead a fruit, and leave a part of the body.

49. Behead an article of furniture, and leave a fastening.

50. Behead an instrument of punishment, and leave a part of the human
body.

51. Behead an animal, and leave an organ of man.

52. Behead a kind of grain, and leave a sensation.

53. Behead a hard substance, and leave a soft one.

[Illustration]

54. Behead and curtail a bird, and leave a pressure.

55. Behead and curtail a culinary utensil, and leave a tax.

56. Behead and curtail one part of the body, and leave another.

57. Behead and curtail a vine, and leave a pronoun.

58. Behead and curtail a fruit, and leave a blow.

59. Behead and curtail an important part of every kitchen, and leave an
animal.

60. Divide a song, and leave an article and a pronoun.

61. Divide a surprising place, and leave a verb, and a shrub.

62. Divide an animal, and leave a verb, a pronoun, and an insect.

63. Divide a musical instrument, and leave a sack, and tube.

64. Divide a game, and leave a combat, and a passage.

65. Divide an insect, and leave a color, and a vessel.

66. Divide an ornament, and leave a pair, and an obstacle.

67. Divide a contract, and leave an obstruction, and a profit.

68. Divide a flower, and leave animals, and a feature.




NAMES OF PLACES ENIGMATICALLY EXPRESSED.

[Illustration]


NAMES OF PLACES IN CONNECTICUT.

1. A kind of tree, and a shallow piece of water.

2. A motion of the atmosphere, and part of a hog.

3. The part equally distant from two extremities, and a collection of
houses.

4. A nickname, and a verb.

5. A vegetable, and a partition.

6. What some men delight in, and a weight.

7. Novel, and a name for fashion.

8. A crossing, and a harbor.

9. Clear, and a portion of real estate.


NAMES OF PLACES IN ILLINOIS.

10. A royal title, and a weight.

11. Being between, and a place of safety for vessels.

12. To clothe, and a lodge for wild beasts.

13. To make secure, and a harbor for vessels.

14. The name of a planet, and a part of a house.

15. A dwelling of royalty, and a part of a fork.

16. The name of a liquid, and the cry of an animal.

17. The name of a lady, and a collection of houses.


NAMES OF PLACES IN NORTH CAROLINA.

18. A fashionable lady’s delight, and a fortified place.

19. Keen resentment, and a narrow valley.

20. An English poet.

21. A place of worship, and elevation.

22. A foreigner, and a collection of houses.

23. The act of making clean, and a weight.

24. What we generally see in winter, and an eminence.

25. A contest, a bird, and a weight.

26. A preposition, and a motion brought about by indolence.


NAMES OF PLACES IN MAINE.

27. A color and a shrub.

28. To consecrate, and a measure of cloth.

29. A river in Italy, and a term applied to a region or country.

30. An intoxicating drink, and a place where water is shallow.

31. An inclosure for animals, and a term applied to adults.

32. A point of the compass, and a small stream of water.

33. A portion of the body, and a greater amount.

34. An animal, and a term applied to diversion.


NAMES OF PLACES IN KENTUCKY.

35. A sharp instrument, and a weight.

36. A wild animal, and a shallow part of a stream.

37. A boy’s name, and a place of defense.

38. An elevation of land, and a name given to money.

39. A man’s name, and a portion of land.

40. One of the points of the compass, and a place of safety.


PLACES IN WISCONSIN.

41. An animal, and a collection of houses.

42. An animal, and the shallow part of a stream.

43. A combat, and a part of a candle.

44. An elevation, and a weight.

45. A southern fruit, and low, wet ground.

46. The name of a celebrated physician, and a collection of houses.

47. An animal, and a musical instrument.

48. A fruit, and a weight.


NAMES OF PLACES IN ASIA.

49. A kind of pouch, and a child’s appellation for his father.

50. A horse, and a small hole.

51. A gash, and a small nail.

52. A thick shrub, and a word expressing anger.

53. A metal cup, and a weight.

54. A pronoun, and an animal.


NAMES OF PLACES IN ENGLAND.

55. A deer, part of a present participle, and part of an animal.

56. An animal, and a crossing.

57. Part of a gun, and the sailor’s desire.

58. What some old ladies and gentlemen wear, and a weight.

59. Sources of water.

60. A grain.


NAMES OF PLACES IN FLORIDA.

61. Two young ladies’ names combined.

62. A silicious mineral of various colors.

63. A large amphibious animal, of rapacious nature.

64. A possessive pronoun, and a covering.

65. A boy’s nickname, and a preposition.

66. An adjective, and one of the battle-fields of Mexico.

[Illustration]


NAMES OF BIRDS.

67. The bird that was in Eden.

68. The bird that cheats.

69. A chess-man.

70. A letter.

71. An architect.

72. A country in Europe.

73. The bird that’s full of mischief and fun.

74. The bird that raises great weights.

75. The bird that is part of a fence.

76. The bird that is always in fear.

77. The bird that assists at your meals.

78. The bird that’s a plaything for boys.


LIST OF FISH.

79. Part of a hennery.

80. A weapon.

81. What the moss-rose did.

82. What the sun lent.

83. What the boys love to do.

84. A pronoun, and an ornament.

85. Two thirds of a proverb, and an ancient vessel.

86. Three quarters of a member of the human body.

87. Minus the letter T--a physician.

88. What we should all be likely to do if we fell in the water.


NAMES OF BIRDS.

89. What we all do when we dine.

90. Nothing, twice five, and fifty.

91. Equality and decay.

92. A female nickname, and what most boys like for dinner.


BATTLES OF ENGLAND.

93. A border, and an elevation.

94. Not ancient, and a kind of fruit.

95. Idle talk, and a part of a domestic animal.

96. To select from others, a letter of the alphabet, and a place for
wild beasts.

97. A liquid, and a game of cards.

98. To draw by a rope, and a weight.


TEA-TABLE.

99. A convulsion of the lungs, and a reward.

100. The state of an Irishman newly-arrived, and a favorite beverage.

101. A species of deer, a useful grain, and a flat loaf.

102. The act of cutting with a sharp instrument, and young maidens.

103. An unruly member.

104. A Latin word signifying earth, and an important article in a lady’s
toilet.

105. Natural jewel-boxes.

106. Two thirds of an animal, and part of the lunch service.

107. A portion, and an elevation.

108. Fireworks.

109. A kid.

110. A man-servant.


BEVERAGES.

111. A small tree.

112. A sailor’s desire.

113. Counterfeit agony.

114. An island in the Atlantic.

115. Merry Andrew.

116. Adam’s ale.

117. Ghosts.


DISTINGUISHED AMERICANS.

118. Distracted, a pronoun and a relation.

119. A month, and to cut.

120. A girl’s name, and a preposition.

121. To fight, and a bird.

122. A part of the body, and an adjective implying powerful.


FLOWER GARDEN.

123. A musical instrument devoured.

124. A fop, and an animal.

125. A portion of time, and a consonant.

126. A blackbird and its claw.

127. Sunrise.

128. The hair of a young lady.

129. A deer, and part of its mouth.

130. A pronoun.

131. A part of the head of a useful animal.

132. Haste, and a spring.

133. A case.

134. A report, and a consonant.

[Illustration: LABYRINTH NO. 4.

Enter at A, and keep traveling along the paths until you reach B. No
climbing allowed.]




CUTTINGS FOR PLANTING.


This may be made an amusing game; as the query for each flower may be
frequently varied: and it will require no great amount of ingenuity to
originate new questions.

[Illustration]

1. If you plant hoarhound candy, what will grow?

2. An English cathedral?

3. The idol Juggernaut?

4. A winter storm?

5. The sky?

6. Aaron’s rod?

7. A Doctor?

8. Dalley’s Pain Extractor?

9. A wise man?

10. Christmas game?

11. A goldsmith?

12. A toad?

13. A scalp?

14. A violincello?

15. Plant a bay horse, and what would grow?

16. Sheep?

17. Daylight?

18. Cupid wounded?

[Illustration]

19. Plant a pig, and what will grow?

20. Some rapid streams.

21. Plant the Celestial Empire, and the richest man in New York.

22. A member of a monastery.

23. Reynard, and a small article of apparel.

24. A Christian name, and a small article from a writing desk.

25. Queen Victoria’s eldest son, with a plume in his hat.

26. Plant vanity, and what will grow?

27. A charming rural retreat?

28. A dry-good’s merchant?

29. A part of one’s hand?

30. The Chinese silk manufacture?

31. A perfumed dandy?

32. What the sun did.

33. Plant the Fourth of July, and what would grow?

34. A young ladies’ seminary?

35. A young ladies’ riding-school?

36. A theological seminary?

37. A jeweler?

38. A shoemaker?

[Illustration]

39. Plant an ape, and what would grow?

40. A cardinal number, and part of the face.

41. Cupid in a scrape.

42. The border of a garment, and a protection against thieves.

43. A pipe.

44. A surgeon.

45. A small pillow.

46. The wandering Jew.

47. A wedding.

48. Plant a tailor, and what would grow?

49. A goslin.

50. A Bruin.

51. The seat of life.

52. A tippler’s nose.

53. A scold.

54. A cart-whip.

55. An artery.

56. A mouse.

57. Old Dobbin.

58. A Louis d’or.




ANAGRAMS.


Properly to enjoy this amusement, it is necessary to be provided with a
box of letters, from which may be selected those forming the anagram.
Place the letters on a book or table, and continue to transpose them
until the original word is discovered. A whole room full of people may
be entertained in this manner.

1. Fill up net.

2. Nice red hams.

3. A dry toil.

4. Rest choir.

5. Ruin a mite.

6. I get dinners.

7. Go nurse.

8. A flirt? Not I!

9. To sin far more.

10. Modest hit.

11. Cover not a sin.

12. O! a plain spice.

13. A tiny sin.

14. Vase, tubs, tins.

15. Ten coons in tar.

16. To gain rules.

17. Tom’s nine hats.

18. Miss no trains.

19. Tread mean pigs.

20. Peel six brines.

21. I meant man’s gem.

22. I call my gin tea.

23. Tin men eat rent.

24. O! story man.

25. Lo! I tug Ned.

26. Tip a den.

27. Go smite.

28. Test rein.

29. No tripe.

30. I put on a mat.

31. Read to me.

32. Lo! I read it.

33. In a tin door.

34. O, I reap tons.

35. Evil June.

36. If led in.

37. I made time.

38. Is Uncle tiffy?

39. I attend in pomps.

40. I don’t want things.

41. Sin is content.

42. I eat brine.

43. Can remember.

44. Find lies.

45. Bold repeal.

46. Gain men.

47. Stern peer.

48. Turn game.

49. Fire iron.

50. O! sued it.

51. I rule not so.

52. I reveal not.

53. Grain a trouble.

54. Event seen.

55. Oh, a harp!

56. Vile beer.

[Illustration]

57. Move it cool.

58. A sinner varies.

59. Bad in Creoles.

60. A pear nipt.

61. Ten ate sir.

62. To a poet.

63. Real sup.

64. I ran to stay.

65. Prove eels.

66. To sit continually.

67. Care not inside.

68. Rats ran into pot.

69. An eel pot.

70. Toe corns.

71. Silver tea.

72. Live tears.

73. Great help.

74. H. sing to me.

75. On dry air.

76. Liars in time.

77. Clouds rise.

78. O! Aunt, I faint!

79. Lions so true.

80. A lost home.

81. I find it one.

82. Lo! I reign.

83. Try on covers.

84. Depart ye rogues.

85. Cure not sin, sir.

86. Pure tar.

87. No ears.

88. Arm-pits.

[Illustration]

89. Time ends rage.

90. Call us noses.

91. Ode songs.

92. Soar, Alps.

93. Hard tug.

94. Charity’s in it.

95. Tree snags.

96. Shine, Sol.

97. Men use mats.

98. Thin bag.

99. Her cry.

100. Sea plant.

101. Paul’s ape.

102. A real stab.

103. Misshape.

104. A paper cane.

105. On many taller.

106. Nor repeat it in mist.

107. Enter pines.

108. Ended puss.

109. Can’t cure Miss E.

110. I can stare.

111. O! it bores us.

112. Real tea dust.

113. Ariel got a burn.

114. No stern action.

115. Eats time.

116. True in fur.

117. Got in a boil.

118. I expect a ton.

119. His tables.

120. Red lance.

121. I need a cyclop.

122. Oh! a split!

123. Ten oars.

124. A dog trial.

125. So I can not tell.

126. I gaze, man.

127. O read tin coins.

128. Iron tribute.

129. So cut, Mary.

130. Ah! in pore, sir?

131. I can not stain.

132. Cut moss.

[Illustration]

133. Mary dips.

134. All pearl.

135. I cannot ride so.

136. In a bay or port.

137. O! I sign at once.

138. Dandy ewes.

139. Fished urn.

140. Red nuts and gin.

141. May nod.

142. Don’t I eat?

143. Red legs.

144. It sent men.

145. Short race.

146. Be alive, nun.

147. O’er assuming.

148. This sable.

149. Pin red fish.

150. It’s on a mantle.

151. City life.

152. I get a mess in vain.

153. A mere dot.

154. Red rum.

155. Gain type.

156. Red oyster.

157. Cart horse.

158. May enrich.

159. Nine thumps.


PLACES IN THE U. S.

160. More tons.

161. Hen sat.

162. A cell, sir.

163. Nose trap.

164. A sin to me.

165. A red cut.

166. Clean stew.

167. Pint o’ stew.


DISTINGUISHED GREEKS.

168. Ears cost.

169. Relax spite.

170. Meet his colts.

171. At ides, sir.

172. Caleb is aid.

173. A slim tide.

174. O! sad line.


NAMES IN ROM. HIST.

175. ’Tis a cut.

176. A coal rig.

177. Not any.

178. Saves a pin.

179. Muser.

180. Call Remus.

181. No, ’tis a nun.

[Illustration]


SCRIPTURAL NAMES.

182. Hide all.

183. Aim at it.

184. I shall eat.

185. I am a band.

186. Must I bear?

187. Head orb.

188. True dimes.

189. I hate a ram.

190. Head-band.

191. Rob a home.

192. Use the meal.

193. Ha! ha! a limbo.

194. Blame thee.

195. I at home! no.

196. Abash them.

197. He has aim.

198. His tar pan.

199. Ship a hen.

200. O! Sam.

201. Hurt.

202. A mob.

203. An oar.

204. I hem a hen.

205. I am on.

206. His trash.

207. The lion.

208. At a man, sir.

209. This is a mat.

210. Pare him.

211. As mule.

212. In dale.

213. Lupa.




CONUNDRUMS.


[Illustration]

1. When is a merchant like Ireland?

2. What kind of likeness can you spell with three letters?

3. Why is intemperance like a worn-out coat?

4. How can you prove that seven is half of twelve?

5. Why should a market-gardener always be punctual?

6. If you throw a chip into the water, what does it become?

7. How does a locomotive at full speed resemble idleness?

8. Where was Washington when his companions put all the lights out?

9. Why is a translated fable like hatred?

10. What is that which is broken by merely naming it?

11. What pies are you not likely to find at the baker’s?

12. Why is the heir-apparent of England like a cloudy day?

13. What foreign letter expresses a title?

14. What two letters express what you ought to do all things?

15. What two letters express an impoverished purse?

16. What four letters express a good drink for a cold?

17. What two letters name a river in America?

18. What two letters name a county in England?

[Illustration]

19. Why is it easy to break into an old man’s house?

20. What is the quickest way to make a thin man fat?

21. How much land is like a decayed tooth?

22. When do your teeth act like your tongue?

23. What foreign letter names the territory of a duke?

24. What tree pinches an Israelite?

25. What is that which pierces and leaves no hole?

26. When is a boat like a lady in love with an artist?

27. Do you know of any word entirely composed of vowels?

28. When does a bonnet resemble a useless search?

29. When are bad dispositions and flour alike?

30. What cordial is Dally’s Pain Extractor like?

31. What nations do poor people like best?

[Illustration]

32. Why is a church spire like Antrim county, Ireland?

33. When we ask the cities of Europe what novelists are called, which
one replies?

34. What bad effect does the letter B have upon sunshine?

35. Who is always ready to reply to any question?

36. What young lady is the most pugnaciously disposed?

37. What young lady most interferes with the serenity of our sanctum?

38. Why can you never believe a man who always fulfills his promises?

39. When may a man be said to be thinner than a shingle?

40. What is more desirable for man than good quarters?

41. What is that which always crosses a river with its head downward?

42. Why is an old woman who can not work, like a young woman who can
work, and does work?

43. Where did Kossuth stand when he first landed in America?

[Illustration: LABYRINTH NO. 5.

Find your way from the gate to the bower, by keeping the right road, and
not jumping over any of the fences.]




SOLUTION TO THE PREFACE.


The enigma is of such ancient and respectable origin, that I shall ask
no one to excuse me for offering this book to the public. Enigmatical
questions are frequent in the Scriptures, and in olden times often
contained a great deal of valuable information.

I intend, my dear young friends, to combine instruction with amusement;
and do not fear but what my expectations will be sufficiently realized.

Right well, I know, little lads and lasses, you can not fail to be
delighted when I am making such efforts in your behalf; so, heartily
shaking you all by the hand,

  I remain,

  Yours truly,

  SANTA CLAUS




SOLUTIONS TO THE PUZZLES.


1. Mimic.

2. Make no friendship with an envious man.

3. Bees put by honey to use in winter.

4. Beware of small expenses, a little leak will sink a ship.

5. Isaiah Bebee, you are too cross, and your ideas are too empty to
amuse any one; you are too epicurean to exercise your energies; nothing
excuses, nothing extenuates your excesses, for you ought to be wiser.

6. Opium and beer, effeminacy and tears, are usually enemies to energy,
and ought to be especially odious to you, dear Ellen.

7. Oh! Emily, benign and effeminate, before you extenuate any excess,
see a wise Deity.

8. Our own caprice is more extravagant than the caprice of fortune.

9. FIVE.--V.

10. Cicero’s orations are superior to any orations of other Roman
orators extant.

11. Cow.

12. Mandate.

13. Civil.

14. II (Two I’s.--H. A. X. V.)

    15. In every land and clime I may be found.
        In air, in water, also under ground;
        Of various sorts I am, and various hues,
        Of various kinds of brown, and various blues;
        I’m sometimes black or gray, and sometimes red:
        You’ll surely find me out from what I’ve said.
        One other hint to aid you in your guess:
        Without me beauty’s self were valueless.      (The eye.)

16. Perverse--preserve.

17. Fiddle. (Take V from FIVE, and insert DDL.)

18. A Chinese.

19. By gently and frequently scratching the table-cloth within three or
four inches of the tumbler, the coin will creep from under.

    20. Come ye ingenious ones, this riddle guess,
        It is not difficult, you will confess.
        What is that number which, if you divide,
        You then will nothing leave on either side?
        (The figure 8, divided laterally.)

21. When one will not, two can not quarrel.

22. A great many of our difficulties may be overcome by assiduity and
proper diligence. Mischief lurks under dissimulation.

23. Draw a horizontal line from the shoulders of one dog to the tail of
the other, and from the fore legs of one to the hind legs of the other.

24. Hasten. (a, an, hat, he, neat, eat, then, at, than, ah!) There are
other words out of which may be made all the parts of speech.

25. Facetiously, Abstemiously.

26. Comic.

27. Clod.

28. Ere long expect a great overturning and uprising in Europe.

29. Dim.

30. Og.

    31. Ye clever knowing ones read me aright,
        And bring my subtle meaning into light.
        ’Twill need some patience, perseverance, tact,
        To set my dislocations--that’s a fact.

32. Why tedious.

33. Little more than kin, and less than kind.

    34. Stop, reader, here, and deign to look
        On one without a name,
        Ne’er entered in the ample book
        Of fortune or of fame.

35. Never put off till to-morrow what can be done to-day.

36. With one cut take off the toe, which will leave three pieces of
paper; place these one upon another, and again cut them through.

37. Research.

38. A SMART REPARTEE.

    Cries Sylvia to a reverend dean,
      What reason can be given,
    Since marriage is a holy thing,
      That there is none in heaven?
    There are no women, he replied.
      She quick returns the jest,
    Women there are, but I’m afraid
      They cannot find a priest.

39. Handsome is that handsome does.

40. Despair blunts the edge of industry.

41. By forgetfulness of injuries, we show ourselves superior to them.

42.

  Berry,
  Birch,
  Bird,
  Bloom,
  Bowers,
  Branch,
  Bush,
  Flowers,
  Gardener,
  Greenleaf,
  Hay,
  Hill,
  Moss,
  Pine,
  Plant,
  Post,
  Reed,
  Root,
  Rose,
  Sand,
  Stone,
  Sickles,
  Thorn,
  Tool,
  Tree,
  Twiggs,
  Flint,
  Weed,
  Wells,
  Wood.

43. Please (plea, sale, peas, sap, leap, sleep, seal, lease, lee, sea,
see, rest.)

44. He had 32 marbles.

45. Great P. D.

46. An X.

47. Brace--ace.


SOLUTIONS TO THE CHARADES.

1. Rainbow.

2. Wormwood.

3. Tomato.

4. Whip-poor-will.

5. Nebula.

6. Larkspur.

7. Courtship.

8. Injury.

9. Footstool.

10. Moss-rose.

11. Napkin.

12. Earnestly.

13. Sebastopol.

14. Mirage.

15. Thousand.

16. Antelope.

17. Chinchilla.

18. Omen.

19. Wholesome.

20. Pardon.

21. Grace Greenwood.

22. Wintergreen.

23. Faith, Hope, and Love.

24. Rosemary.

25. Violet.

26. Firefly.

27. Peerless.

28. Patagonia.

29. Light-house.

30. Honeymoon.

31. Harebell.

32. Moonlight.


SOLUTIONS TO THE RIDDLES.

1. A yard-stick.

2. A postage stamp.

3. Eyelids.

4. A blush.

5. The letter C (ore, core, etc).

6. A newspaper.

7. A hiss.

8. The letter A.

9. A key.

10. A kiss.

11. That.

12. Time.

13. A shadow.

14. A broom.

15. Lightning.


SOLUTIONS TO THE REBUSSES.

1. Ire--fire.

2. C. I. D.

3. Scrap, cap, rap, ape, pear, ear,--scrape.

4. Fowl, owl.

5. Prussia, Russia.

6. Tear, tea, head--thread.

7. Goat, oat, goa.

8. Take N from None, and leave One.

9. Wheel, heel, eel.

10. A, an, Ann, Anna, annal, annals.

11. Murmur.

12. Pay up.

13. Alice, malice.

14. Snail, nail, ail.

15. Palm, lamp.

16. Beet, bee, bet.

17. Pap, Papa.

  18. 1. Live. Evil. Vile. Veil.
      2. Meat. Mate. Tame. Team.
      3. Amen. Mean. Mane. Name.
      4. Emit. Item. Mite. Time.
      5. Dale. Deal. Lade. Lead.
      6. Arts. Rats. Star. Tars.
      7. Plea. Pale. Peal. Leap.
      8. Sent. Nets. Tens. Nest.

19. Pain.

20. Rome (more, or, me, mer, O ore).

21. CIVIL.

22. Flower-pot.

23. Jay, J, ay, y (Why!)

24. Glance.

25. Troy, tory, tyro.

26. Garden, danger.

27. Dennis.

28. Spark, park, ark.

29. Done, one, Don.

30. Prelate.

31. Arm, harm, charm.

32. Boat, oat, boa.

33. Tear, ear, tea.

34. Tame, team, meat, mate.

35. This, his, is.

36. Ned, end, den.

37. Levi, veil, live, evil.

38. Heart, ear, hear, eat, tear, earth.

39. Clear, Lear, ear, Ar, lea.

40. Unreal, real.

41. At, eat, heat, wheat.

42. Chair, hair, air.

43. Rite, right, write, wright.

44. Thorn, horn, Thor, north.

45. Murder (red rum).

46. Ark, lark.

47. Rat, tar, art.

48. Stare, tare, are, ear.

49. Tars, rats, arts, star.

50. Devil, evil, vile, il, lie.

51. Place, lace, ace (three fifths of brace).

52. Rite, write, right, wright.

53. Ladder, lad, adder.

54. Anna.

55. J.U.L.I.A.

56. Claw, law.

57. Cod (Od, Co, O, C, D).

58. Fire-side.

59. Star, rats.

60. Your.


SOLUTIONS TO THE ENIGMAS.

1. Miss Caroline Herschel.

2. The more haste, the less speed.

3. Thou shalt not steal.

4. Carpenters.

5. America.

6. Building castles in the air.

7. Two boys, one named _Andrew_ and the other _Thomas_, went to _see_
their Uncle _M----_ one _winter_. He had _two_ fine _horses_, but he
forbid the _lads_ to _ride_ without his _consent_. But Master _T._ was a
_careless_ and _wild_ boy, but his brother _A._ was obedient to his
uncle’s _wishes_. One _day_, Master _T._ said to his brother, “Let’s
_saddle_ the _horses_, for we have a fine _chance_. Uncle has gone to
_town_.” “_No_, indeed,” answered _Master A._; “_how_ can you _do_ what
you _say_? Has not uncle forbid us to _ride_ them?” But Master _T._ did
not _attend_ to what his brother said. He took _one_ of the _horses_ and
_rode him_, but was _thrown_ and severely hurt; and having disregarded
his uncle’s _commands_, he _lost_ his good opinion, and _lay ill_ for
_three_ weeks, and during the _Christmas and New Year Holidays_.

8. A barking dog seldom bites.

9. Hope is grief’s best music.

10. America discovered by Columbus.

11. Follow the wise few rather than the vulgar many.

12. Pianos.

13. Crocodile.

14. Revillagigedo.

15. No man can serve two masters.

16. Great haste is not always good speed.

17. Declaration of Independence.


SOLUTIONS TO THE ACROSTICS.

1. Table-cloth;--Tunic, Angel, Bato, Locust, Elijah.

2. Bird-cage;--Bac, Ithaca, Rag, Dove.

3. Homer-Iliad;--Houri, Ovidopol, Magi, Egeria, Richmond.

4. Plum-tree;--Part, Lair, Ucase, mace.

5. Piano-stool;--Puss, Idiot, Arno, Nero, Owl.

6. Card-case;--Chronic, Acacia, Rhesus, Daphne.

7. Port-wine;--Pew, Obi, Ruin, Time.

8. Sign-post;--Sap, Itasco, Grass, Nut.

9. Strawberry;--Stab, Toe, Rove, Air, Whey.


SOLUTIONS TO THE DECAPITATIONS.

1. Craft,--raft.

2. Skill,--kill.

3. Whole,--hole.

4. Spear,--pear.

5. Climb,--limb.

6. Crush,--rush.

7. Crude,--rude.

8. Blake,--Lake.

9. Beaton,--Eaton.

10. Brooke,--Rooke.

11. Cheyne,--Heyne.

12. Spain,--pain.

13. Sword,--word.

14. Slaughter,--laughter.

15. Male,--ale.

16. Twine,--wine.

17. Knag,--nag.

18. Scent,--cent.

19. Tape,--ape.

20. Scuttle,--Cuttle.

21. Flock,--lock.

22. Ladder,--adder.

23. Snail,--nail.

24. Blight,--light.

25. Bridge,--ridge.

26. Score,--core.

27. Core,--Ore.

28. Shovel,--hovel.

29. Twig,--wig.

30. Lass,--ass.

31. Griddle,--riddle.

32. Ghost,--host.

33. Glisten,--listen.

34. Fox,--ox.

35. Flute,--lute.

36. Fowl,--owl.

37. Aye,--ye.

38. Madame,--a dame.

39. Lark,--ark.

40. Acorn,--corn.

41. Glass,--lass.

42. Brook,--rook.

43. Link,--ink.

44. Ship,--hip.

45. Rice,--ice.

46. Strap,--trap.

47. Spool,--pool.

48. Pear,--ear.

49. Clock,--lock.

50. Whip,--hip.

51. Bear,--ear.

52. Wheat,--heat.

53. Flint,--lint.

54. Snipe,--nip.

55. Grater,--rate.

56. Heart,--ear.

57. Gourd,--our.

58. Grape,--rap.

59. Grate,--rat.

60. An-them.

61. Am-bush.

62. Be-he-moth.

63. Bag-pipe.

64. Battle-door.

65. Blue-bottle.

66. Brace-let.

67. Bar-gain.

68. Cows-lip.


SOLUTIONS TO THE NAMES.

1. Ashford.

2. Windham.

3. Centreville.

4. Danbury.

5. Cornwall.

6. Huntington.

7. Newton.

8. Bridgeport.

9. Fairfield.

10. Princeton.

11. Middleport.

12. Dresden.

13. Lockport.

14. Marshall.

15. Palestine.

16. Waterloo.

17. Elizabethtown.

18. Beaufort.

19. Iredell.

20. Milton.

21. Chapel Hill.

22. Germantown.

23. Washington.

24. Snow Hill.

25. Warrenton.

26. Onslow.

27. Greenbush.

28. Hallowell.

29. Poland.

30. Rumford.

31. Parkman.

32. Westbrook.

33. Livermore.

34. Bucksport

35. Piketon.

36. Hartford.

37. Frankfort.

38. Mount Sterling.

39. Morganfield.

40. Westport.

41. Foxville.

42. Hartford.

43. Warwick.

44. Clifton.

45. Lemonweir.

46. Fitchburg.

47. Elkhorn.

48. Appleton.

49. Bagdad.

50. Nagpore.

51. Cuttach.

51. Bushire.

53. Canton.

54. Herat.

55. Buckingham.

56. Oxford.

57. Stockport.

58. Wigton.

59. Wells.

60. Rye.

61. Marianna.

62. Jasper.

63. Alligator.

64. Micanopy.

65. Walton.

66. New Buena Vista.

67. Bird of Paradise.

68. Gull.

69. Rook.

70. Jay.

71. Wren.

72. Turkey.

73. Lark.

74. Crane.

75. Rail.

76. Quail.

77. Swallow.

78. Kite.

79. Perch.

80. Pike.

81. Smelt.

82. Ray.

83. Skate.

84. Herring.

85. Shark.

86. Eel.

87. Sturgeon.

88. Flounder.

89. Swallow.

90. Owl.

91. Parrot.

92. Magpie.

93. Edgehill.

94. Newberry.

95. Chatham.

96. Culloden.

97. Waterloo.

98. Towton.

99. Coffee.

100. Green tea.

101. Buckwheat cakes.

102. Molasses.

103. Tongue.

104. Terrapin.

105. Oysters.

106. Radishes.

107. Partridge.

108. Crackers.

109. A little butter.

110. Porter.

111. Shrub.

112. Port.

113. Champagne.

114. Madeira.

115. Punch.

116. Water.

117. Spirits.

118. Madison.

119. Mayhew.

120. Marion.

121. Warren.

122. Armstrong.

123. Violet.

124. Dandelion.

125. Daisy.

126. Crow-foot.

127. Morning glory.

128. Maiden hair.

129. Fallow tongue.

130. Yew.

131. Oxlip.

132. Speedwell.

133. Box.

134. Poppy.


SOLUTIONS TO THE CUTTINGS.

1. Candy-tuft.

2. Canterbury bells.

3. Widows’ tears.

4. Snow-drops.

5. Blue-bell.

6. Snake-root.

7. Rhubarb.

8. Heart’s ease.

9. Sage.

10. Snapdragon.

11. Golden rod.

12. Hops.

13. Scull-cap.

14. Violet.

15. Chestnut.

16. Flox.

17. Morning Glory.

18. Love lies bleeding.

19. Hog-weed.

20. Currants.

21. China aster.

22. Monk’s hood.

23. Fox-glove.

24. Jonquil.

25. Prince of Wales’ feathers.

26. Venus’ looking-glass.

27. Virgin’s bower.

28. Ladies’ mantles.

29. Lady’s thumb.

30. Pride of China.

31. Coxcomb.

32. Rose.

33. Rockets.

34. Blue-bells.

35. Canterbury bells.

36. Jack in the pulpit.

37. Ladies’ ear-drops.

38. Ladies’ slippers.

39. Monkey-flower.

40. Tulips.

41. Love in a tangle.

42. Hemlock.

43. Tube-rose.

44. Boneset.

45. Feather-few.

46. Live forever.

47. Matrimony vine.

48. Cabbage.

49. Gooseberry.

50. Bear’s-foot.

51. Heart’s ease.

52. Bottle-pink.

53. Snapdragon.

54. Hawthorn.

55. Bloodroot.

56. Catnip.

57. Horse-chestnut.

58. Penny royal.


SOLUTIONS TO THE ANAGRAMS.

1. Plentiful.

2. Merchandise.

3. Idolatry.

4. Chorister.

5. Miniature.

6. Ingredients.

7. Surgeon.

8. Flirtations.

9. Reformations.

10. Methodist.

11. Conversation.

12. Episcopalian.

13. Insanity.

14. Substantive.

15. Consternation.

16. Regulations.

17. Astonishment.

18. Transmission.

19. Disparagement.

20. Inexpressible.

21. Mismanagement.

22. Enigmatically.

23. Entertainment.

24. Astronomy.

25. Longitude.

26. Painted.

27. Egotism.

28. Interest.

29. Pointer.

30. Amputation.

31. Moderate.

32. Editorial.

33. Ordination.

34. Operations.

35. Juvenile.

36. Infidel.

37. Immediate.

38. Sufficiently.

39. Disappointment.

40. Notwithstanding.

41. Inconsistent.

42. Inebriate.

43. Remembrance.

44. Infidels.

45. Deplorable.

46. Meaning.

47. Represent.

48. Argument.

49. Inferior.

50. Tedious.

51. Resolutions.

52. Revelation.

53. Gubernatorial.

54. Seventeen.

55. Pharaoh.

56. Believer.

57. Locomotive.

58. Anniversaries.

59. Considerable.

60. Appertain.

61. Reinstate.

62. Potatoe.

63. Pleasure.

64. Stationary.

65. Oversleep.

66. Constitutionally.

67. Inconsiderate.

68. Transportation.

69. Antelope.

70. Coronets.

71. Versatile.

72. Relatives.

73. Telegraph.

74. Something.

75. Ordinary.

76. Ministerial.

77. Disclosure.

78. Infatuation.

79. Resolutions.

80. Loathsome.

81. Definition.

82. Religion.

83. Controversy.

84. Daguerreotype.

85. Insurrections.

86. Rapture.

87. Reason.

88. Imparts.

89. Disagreement.

90. Callousness.

91. Goodness.

92. Parasols.

93. Draught.

94. Christianity.

95. Greatness.

96. Holiness.

97. Amusements.

98. Bathing.

99. Cherry.

100. Pleasant.

101. Applause.

102. Alabaster.

103. Emphasis.

104. Appearance.

105. Ornamentally.

106. Misinterpretation.

107. Serpentine.

108. Suspended.

109. Circumstances.

110. Ascertain.

111. Boisterous.

112. Adulterates.

113. Gubernatorial.

114. Consternation.

115. Estimate.

116. Furniture.

117. Obligation.

118. Expectation.

119. Establish.

120. Calender.

121. Encyclopedia.

122. Hospital.

123. Treason.

124. Gladiator.

125. Constellation.

126. Magazine.

127. Consideration.

128. Retribution.

129. Customary.

130. Parishioner.

131. Incantations.

132. Customs.

133. Pyramids.

134. Parallel.

135. Consideration.

136. Probationary.

137. Negotiations.

138. Wednesday.

139. Furnished.

140. Understanding.

141. Monday.

142. Antidote.

143. Ledgers.

144. Sentiment.

145. Orchestra.

146. Unenviable.

147. Ignoramuses.

148. Establish.

149. Friendship.

150. Lamentations.

151. Felicity.

152. Imaginativeness.

153. Moderate.

154. Murder.

155. Punishment.

156. Destroyer.

157. Orchestra.

158. Machinery.

159. Egyptian.

160. Montrose.

161. Athens.

162. Carlisle.

163. Paterson.

164. Minnesota.

165. Decatur.

166. Newcastle.

167. West Point.

168. Socrates.

169. Praxiteles.

170. Themistocles.

171. Aristides.

172. Alcibiadas.

173. Miltiades.

174. Leonides.

175. Tacitus.

176. Agricola.

177. Antony.

178. Vespasian.

179. Remus.

180. Marcellus.

181. Antonius.

182. Delilah.

183. Amittai.

184. Salathiel.

185. Aminadab.

186. Bartimeus.

187. Deborah.

188. Demetrius.

189. Arimathea.

190. Benhadad.

191. Rehoboam.

192. Methusael.

193. Aholibamah.

194. Mehetabel.

195. Menothai.

196. Bashemath.

197. Shemaiah.

198. Parthians.

199. Phinehas.

200. Amos.

201. Ruth.

202. Moab.

203. Aaron.

204. Nehemiah.

205. Naomi.

206. Tarshish.

207. Othniel.

208. Samaritan.

209. Matthias.

210. Ephraim.

211. Samuel.

212. Daniel.

213. Paul.


SOLUTIONS TO THE CONUNDRUMS.

1. When his capital is doubling (Dublin).

2. Effigy (F. E. G.).

3. It is a bad habit.

4. Draw a line across “XII,” and leave “VII.”

5. Because he should always keep good time (thyme).

6. Wet.

7. It is inactivity (in activity).

8. In the dark.

9. Because it is aversion (a version).

10. Silence.

11. Magpies.

12. He is likely to reign.

13. A Dutch S (duchess).

14. XL.

15. MT.

16. LOOT (Elder-blow-tea).

17. P. D.

18. S X.

19. Because his gait is broken and his locks are few.

20. Throw him out of a three-story window, and he will come down
_plump_.

21. An acre.

22. When they chatter.

23. A Dutch Y (a duchy).

24. Juniper.

25. Sound.

26. When it is attached to a painter.

27. Aye.

28. When it’s without a veil (avail).

29. When they are inbred (in bread).

30. Curasoa (cure a sore).

31. Do-nations.

32. Because there’s a bell fast (Belfast) in it.

33. Rome answers (romancers).

34. It makes light blight.

35. Ann, sir (answer).

36. Belle Igerent.

37. Miss Chief.

38. How can you take a man’s word, if he always keeps it?

39. When he’s a shaving.

40. Better-halves.

41. A nail in a horse-shoe.

42. They are notable (not able).

43. On his feet.




  JOHN H. TINGLEY,

  152½ FULTON STREET, NEW YORK,

  DEALER IN ALL KINDS OF

  BOOKS AND STATIONERY,

  _Very Cheap for Cash_.

  AND

  PUBLISHER OF THE FOLLOWING GAMES:

  Game of Familiar Quotations,
  In neat case, price 50 cents.

  New Game of Authors,
  In neat case, price 50 cents.

  Game of Great Events,
  In neat case, price 50 cents.

  Game of Red, White and Blue,
  In neat case, price 50 cents.

  Game of Battles North and South,
  In neat case, price 50 cents.

  Sole Agent for Judge Whitty’s Pantological Game of

  Chevy Chase.

  Juvenile edition      75 cents.
  Large       “      $1.00

  Any of the above Games sent free, by mail, by remitting the above
  prices.




Transcriber’s Notes


  This text follows the original printed work; inconsistent and unusual
  spelling have been retained, except as mentioned below.

  Depending on the hard- and software used to read this text, not all
  elements may display as intended.


Changes made:

  page iii: page number 5 changed to v
  page 10:  for writing os changed to for writing es; testament a drain
            changed to testament drain; XIOU88 changed to X10U88 (nr.
            5);
  page 12:  ro yreg changed to ro yrag
  page 18:  earth agrain changed to earth a grain
  page 32:  Athough a part changed to Although a part
  page 72:  punctuation corrected to conform with the solution
  page 73:  whole is a proverb changed to My whole is a proverb
  page 83:  Bead a tool changed to Behead a tool
  page 110: on the ample book changed to in the ample book; They can not
            find changed to They cannot find







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SANTA CLAUS' BOOK OF GAMES AND PUZZLES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


