The Project Gutenberg eBook of A golden thread
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A golden thread

Author: Marian Isabel Hurrell

Release date: June 26, 2025 [eBook #76385]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Epworth Press, 1927


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GOLDEN THREAD ***



Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[Illustration]


                        A GOLDEN THREAD


                              BY

                     MARIAN ISABEL HURRELL


                        [Illustration]


                            London
                      THE EPWORTH PRESS
                       J. ALFRED SHARP



                       Printed in 1927.



                     ———————————————————
            MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
       RUSH & WARWICK, HARPUR PRINTING WORKS, BEDFORD.



                           CONTENTS

CHAP.

    I. EILEEN AND THE EDITOR

   II. "CORPORAL" BANNISTER

  III. PROMOTION

   IV. BUSY GARDENERS

    V. TAKEN IN CHARGE

   VI. CONFESSION

  VII. A NARROW ESCAPE

 VIII. DICK'S LETTER

   IX. CISSIE VANE

    X. THE LOST NIECE

   XI. FRANK'S GIFT

  XII. HOME AGAIN



                        A GOLDEN THREAD

CHAPTER I.

Eileen and the Editor.

"PLEASE are you Mr. Charlton, the editor of 'Sunny Hours?'"

The fourteen-year-old girl who put the question—Eileen Bannister by
name—looked a little puzzled as she spoke.

The man who had just risen from a deck-chair under the shadow of a tree
was not Eileen's idea of an editor at all: she had expected to see some
one much older.

"Yes," was the answer, pleasantly spoken, "I am; what can I do for you?"

"Oh, please," replied Eileen, who was carrying a long and rather bulky
envelope in her hand, "I want to talk to you for five minutes, if I
may. I won't stay longer, because an editor's time is precious, and
besides the others are all waiting for me in the lane."

"Take this chair, Miss—er—' began Derrick Charlton, placing his own at
her disposal.

"My name is Eileen Bannister," supplied the girl, "and I write stories."

Here a flush came into her intelligent little face—Eileen was small for
her age.

"But I won't take your chair," she went on politely; "this seat where
your papers are will do for me."

So saying, Eileen, who was not troubled with shyness, removed the
papers with respectful care to a wicker table near by, and seated
herself for a five minutes' chat.

Mr. Charlton, almost against his will, began to feel interested and
amused.

"And so you write stories, do you?" he said. "But how came you to track
me here?"

"I was going up to the house to call upon you," was the answer, "only I
saw you on the lawn, and so—"

"I don't mean that," interrupted Mr. Charlton; "I am wondering
how it is that you knew anything at all about me. I came to this
out-of-the-world spot, by doctor's orders, for a holiday—not to read or
write a single story.'

"Oh, I 'am' sorry," said Eileen; "perhaps I had better go away at once."

"No, the five minutes 'aren't' up yet. Tell me how you came to know of
my whereabouts."

"Well, it was like this: Mrs. Stannard, your landlady, told our maid
Sarah all about you, and we were ever so interested."

"Oh indeed! As you know so much about me, don't you think you might
tell me a little about yourself?"

"Yes, if you would like to hear," said Eileen, nothing loth. "There are
four of us. I'm the eldest; and after me comes Edward—we call him Teddy
for short; then there's Nora and Frank. Daddy is away just now doing
some work for his firm in America—he is illustrating a book for them.
Daddy is an awfully clever artist, and he says I take after him. I've
brought some little pictures," she went on, "that I've done for a story
I want you to read if you will. I 'do' hope you'll like them."

"No doubt I shall," was the reply, "if you are an 'awfully clever
artist' like your father."

The tone was so kindly that the satire was quite lost.

"Aren't there any more of you?" went on Mr. Charlton next. "Surely you
haven't come to an end of your family history yet. What about your
mother?"

The question was keenly regretted an instant later.

A sudden shadow came into Eileen's pretty blue eyes.

"I—I can't talk about her, please," she said, with a little catch in
her voice. "She—she died just about a year ago, and since then—since
then our housekeeper, Mrs. Weston, has mothered us. She is ever so
kind, and we're very fond of her, but of course she isn't like—"

"Oh no, of course not," said Mr. Charlton, as Eileen hesitated; "I can
quite understand that."

For a full minute there was silence, and then Eileen went on in quite
her usual voice.

"We haven't got much money," she said, "and that is why I am trying
to earn some. If the mortgage—that is a debt that daddy owes on the
house—is not paid off before Christmas, we shall have to leave The
Gables, our dear old home. We shall just hate going, for we love every
stick and stone of it."

Mr. Charlton, having seen and admired the pretty gabled dwelling, could
fully sympathize.

"We haven't told many people yet," proceeded Eileen, "but of course
daddy knows—we four children are going to help pay off the mortgage.
We've bought a money-box, and all that we earn is going to be put into
it. Isn't it a good idea?"

"It is indeed," smiled Mr. Charlton. "I wish you luck, but I think
you've undertaken rather a big task."

"I know we have," replied Eileen, "a very big task. But we've prayed
about it, and we mean to do our best."

Mr. Charlton was touched by the little girl's evident sincerity.

At this moment a shrill, clear whistle was heard, and Eileen rose to go.

"My five minutes 'are' up now," she said, "and I must say good-bye.
That is Teddy whistling for me—I expect they're tired of waiting. Here
is my story," she added, holding out the big envelope. "You 'will' read
it, won't you? That is, if you think your doctor wouldn't mind."

[Illustration: "HERE IS MY STORY," SHE ADDED, HOLDING OUT A BIG
ENVELOPE.]

Mr. Charlton burst into a ringing laugh.

"I don't suppose he'd mind very much," said he, his eyes twinkling.
"Yes, I'll read it, and later on you shall know what I think of it."

Shortly after this, with a friendly handclasp, the two parted.


No sooner had Eileen joined her brothers and sister at the gate than
she was besieged with questions. Mr. Charlton could hear their voices,
but not the words they were saying.

"Well!" It was Teddy, who first spoke. "Did you see the editor?"

"Did he look at your story?" asked Nora, before Eileen had time to
answer.

"Did you feel frightened of him?" asked Frank, with a grin on his
good-natured young face. "I expect he growled at you, like they say old
Grimwood does when he's got the gout." (Mr. Grimwood was one of the
residents of the village who had the unenviable reputation of a very
hasty temper.)

Eileen laughed merrily—a laugh which reached Mr. Charlton's ears, as he
once more settled himself to his papers.

"That's a sound to do one's heart good," he murmured. "I think I shall
have to make the acquaintance of those youngsters. Who knows? They may
help to brighten up a deadly dull holiday."

Soon after this there was silence, the voices dying away in the
distance—Eileen meanwhile doing her best to answer all questions
satisfactorily.

It was a cloudless August morning. The air was sweet with the songs
of birds, and perfumed with the scent of roses wafted from cottage
gardens. More than one turned to look after the children as they wended
their way homewards, for owing to their friendly dispositions, they
were great favourites in the village. Hazlenook, the pretty country
spot where they lived, was situated near the sea, a fact which rendered
it a desirable place for those who were seeking a quiet holiday,
combined with bracing air.

The young people were just about to pass the door of the village
shoemaker, when a gruff voice called from the open window.



CHAPTER II.

"Corporal" Bannister.

"CORPORAL, I want to speak to you." It was Henry Henderson, the
shoemaker, or "The old Sergeant," as he was known in the village, who
spoke.

In an instant Frank, whom he addressed, made answer:

"All right, sergeant, I'm coming."

And with this, he left the others, and made his way into the little
low-ceilinged shop to have a chat with the old man, for the two were
excellent friends.

"I want to know," said Henderson, "when you are going to drill them
recruits of yours again. I ain't seen no soldiering on the Green for
nearly a week. You'll never get your third stripe if you neglect your
duty."

"It hasn't been my fault, sergeant," replied the little lad, "really
and truly. There have been so many things to hinder me, one way and
another."

"Well, well, if it wasn't your fault, I won't scold you. What about
to-morrow afternoon?"

"To-morrow—Saturday? Yes, I can manage it. You might put up a notice in
the window to let the boys know, will you?"

This was the usual proceeding, and the old sergeant smilingly agreed.
In his day he had been a brave and gallant soldier, and right well had
he fought for his country.

"What time shall we say?" he asked next.

"At two o'clock," answered Frank; "and mind you put 'sharp.'"

"All right, young master. I suppose you'll be in uniform?"

"Of course I shall, sergeant. I say,—" (here Frank looked a little
pleading), "when do you think I shall be able to get my third stripe?"

"All in good time, sonnie," replied the old man; "you're a bit young
yet to be a full sergeant."

"Now then, 'Enery," (here came a woman's voice from the little parlour
behind the shop), "when you've done with your play-actin', you might as
well come in and 'ave your dinner. If you don't, I shall 'ave the 'ash
all done to smash.'

"Didn't know you could make up poetry, my dear," answered Henderson, in
no way disturbed.

He loved this bit of "play-acting," as his wife called it, with "Master
Frank," and no greater delight had he than to stand at his shop door,
which faced the village green, and watch the "corporal" drill his
"men," a band of village lads whose ages varied from six to ten.
Soldiering was a very favourite game with Frank, and occasionally his
brother and sisters would consent to being drilled just for the sake of
pleasing him.

On Frank's ninth birthday his father had given him a suit of khaki—the
child had preferred it to any other present. But it was old Henderson
who had supplied the stripes, and raised him to the rank of corporal.
It was he, too, who had taught the little lad the drill, Frank proving
a very apt pupil.

The notice which Henderson put in his shop window early on Saturday
morning ran thus:

                  Corporal Bannister
        will Drill his Soldiers this Afternoon
             at Two o'clock on the Green.
                 New Recruits Wanted.

And new recruits came, as it proved. There were twenty lads gathered
together on the Green when the corporal made his appearance—a sturdy,
well-set-up little figure dressed in khaki.

Amongst the interested onlookers during the afternoon was Mr. Charlton.
He chanced to take up his stand by old Henderson's shop. And the
shoemaker, having the leisure, and being in a chatty frame of mind,
told him many things concerning the Bannister family.

He learnt of Frank's longing to be a sergeant, and discovered,
moreover, that Henderson had been told all about the mortgage-box.

"My only fear," said the old man, "is that it should spoil them nice
youngsters and turn them into money-grubbers."

"I don't think there is much fear of that," replied Mr. Charlton; and
he was right.

[Illustration: BOTH BOYS PEERED OVER THE EDGE OF THE CLIFF.]

After the drilling was over that afternoon, the corporal and several of
the other lads made up their minds to have a ramble by the sea-shore.
This was a very frequent ending up to the game of soldiering when there
happened to be time.

Amongst the village boys was a lad by the name of David Perry, who was
a favourite with Frank.

He was the son of a widow lady who was very poor, and who lived in
quite a little cottage near the sea.

The two had interests in common, and so it happened that they presently
drifted from the others and climbed by slow degrees to the top of the
cliff.

Feeling hot and tired, they sat down for a while to rest, and were just
in the middle of a chat when loud cries from below fell on their ears.

"Help! Help!" The words rang out again and again.

Frank and David knew in a moment that something was wrong with their
comrades. Both boys peered over the edge of the cliff, and the sight
which met their eyes made them lose something of the healthy colour in
their cheeks.

Midway on the cliffs, about twenty feet from the shore, were five or
six of the boys, too frightened to move one way or another.

Instead of taking the winding path by which they could have ascended in
perfect safety, they had attempted to climb the steeper part.

"Oh, Frank," cried David, "whatever 'shall' we do? They'll fall in a
minute and—and—"

David was almost in tears; he was not of a particularly brave
disposition.

"We've got to go and help them," said Frank, "and look sharp about it
too."

"I—I can't," half sobbed poor David. "It makes me dizzy even to think
about it."

"All right then," replied Frank, half impatiently. "You stop where you
are, and I'll go."

David did as he was bidden. Without another word Frank started on his
work of rescue. Fortunately, he knew the cliffs as well as any little
boy in the village. Close to where the lads were standing in such peril
was a narrow path which, if they could only keep their heads, they
could reach without much difficulty. But at the present moment they
were too paralysed with fear to realize anything except their danger.

Frank took the winding path, and well before five minutes had passed he
was within a few feet of the terrified lads.

At the sight of him, they redoubled their cries for help. By an unlucky
chance, Frank took one look at the depth below, and for a moment his
brave little heart failed him.

Then a sudden thought of "Mother" flashed into his mind—of his mother
who had said that God never failed to watch over His children. His
fears then seemed to leave him, and he answered the shouts for aid in
quite a steady voice.

"Don't be frightened," said he, "it's all right; you've got nothing to
be afraid of. I'll help you."

And the boys felt sure he would.

"All you've got to do," went on Frank, "is just to step along that
narrow edge of cliff and make for me. There's a path where I'm
standing, only you can't see it because it's nearly hidden by bushes."

"We—we're afraid to move," faltered out Willie Benson, the foremost of
the lads; "if we do, we shall fall."

"Stupids!" cried little Frank. "Do as you are told!" His voice was
peremptory. "Willie, you catch hold of that bush this minute; I'll come
and meet you part of the way, and hold out my hand."

Frank was as good as his word.

Willie hesitated for a second, and then took the first step towards
safety. Finding the undergrowth well able to bear the strain put upon
it, he presently gained a certain amount of pluck.

There was almost breathless silence as he moved along step by step
nearer his young rescuer. At last, his hand was gripped in Frank's
tight clasp, and in less time than it takes to tell he was out of
danger.

Then came hope and strength to all the others. One by one they followed
Willie's example, and very soon, to the relief of everybody concerned,
their perils were a thing of the past.

By five o'clock that evening old Henderson had heard the story, not
from Frank, but from David Perry, who had watched the whole scene with
fascinated gaze from the top of the cliff.

"Bless the boy!" he muttered, after David had left him to spread the
news in the village. "I knew he was made of the right stuff—plucky
little chap that he is! He deserves to be a sergeant, and a sergeant he
shall be!"

And this was how little "Corporal" Bannister won his third stripe.



CHAPTER III.

Promotion.

"WELL, children," said Mrs. Weston at breakfast, on the Monday which
followed the cliff adventure, "how are you going to amuse yourselves
to-day?"

She was very fond of her young charges, and was remarkably easy-going
where their liberty was concerned.

"We haven't made up our minds yet," said Teddy, spreading his bread and
butter plentifully with marmalade. "Earn some money if we can, very
likely, for the mortgage-box."

Mrs. Weston smiled. The matter which at first was intended to be kept
as a great secret was now known to about half a dozen people.

"Earning money isn't quite such an easy, matter as you think, my dear,"
said she; "you are not going to get anything for nothing."

"We don't mind work," said Nora, "if it is in a good cause."

At this they all laughed; for if there was a lazy member of the
Bannister family, it was pretty Nora.

Nothing more was said just then upon the subject, for at this moment
the post came, bringing with it a long, interesting letter from their
father, which was addressed to Eileen.

This she read aloud for the enjoyment of all—a letter from daddy
somehow seemed a bit of himself.

After breakfast—it was Teddy's suggestion—the children arranged to
spend the day out of doors, and, a basket of goodies being packed for
lunch, they prepared to start forth on their way.

"Now, mind you take care of yourselves," said Mrs. Weston, as she bade
them good-bye at the garden gate, "and don't be late home for tea."

"We'll take care of ourselves right enough, Mrs. Weston dear," replied
Eileen. "Don't you worry."

A few minutes after this, having promised to be home in time for tea,
they were lost to sight round a corner of the road.

As they passed down the village street, old Henderson, who was standing
at his shop door, caught sight of them.

"Good-morning, young ladies and gentlemen," said he, as they drew near;
"I've been wanting to see one or the other of you—Master Frank in
particular."

"What was it you wanted to see me about, sergeant?" asked Frank, with
quick interest, little dreaming of the honour which was in store for
him.

"Just to say this, Master Frank; I'm right proud of you for the part
you played in rescuing them youngsters on the cliff, and I should think
your brother and sisters are too."

Frank, in telling the story of the cliff adventure at home, had made
very little of it, consequently not one in the household realized how
truly courageous the little fellow had been.

"It was jolly lucky, he didn't lose his head," said Teddy.

"It was jolly lucky, as you say, Master Teddy, he didn't lose his life"
(this severely); "I don't think you quite understand how plucky he was."

Frank, now rosy red, tried to turn the conversation, but Henderson was
not so inclined.

"You've got your promotion now, young sir," he went on, looking at
Frank, with the kindest pair of eyes; "I shall have your third stripe
ready for you to-morrow." And here the old man saluted.

Frank, feeling half an inch taller, did the same. "How awf'ly kind
of you," he said, in delight; "I'd rather be sergeant than King of
England!"

"Play-actin' again, I do declare!" It was Mrs. Henderson's voice.
She had bustled in from the little parlour behind the shop and had
overheard part of the conversation. "Well, I never did, 'Enery; you are
a silly old man!"

'Enery chuckled with amusement.

"Yes, so I be, and you're a silly old woman! Where are those apples
you've been saving up for these youngsters?"

"I've got 'em here, close and handy," replied the good soul, coming
forward with a basket, which she had taken up from the shelf near by.
"I think, my dears," she went on, turning to the children, "you'll find
plenty to go all round."

True enough they did, a goodly store which made a very welcome addition
to their luncheon-basket. Shortly after this, with grateful thanks and
friendly good-byes, they went on their way.

Right proud was the "sergeant" to receive the congratulations of his
brother and sisters. But Eileen and Teddy, realizing from Henderson's
words more of the risks he had run, warned him never to do such a thing
again.

"Don't suppose it would happen another time," said Frank; "if it
did—well, I should do just the same." And he spoke truly.


Ten minutes later they were passing an old house which stood on the
outskirts of the village. It was a dreary, neglected looking place,
called The Laurels, and the garden was a mass of weeds.

"What a lark it would be," said Teddy, "to go up to the house and ask
Mr. Grimwood for a day's gardening!"

Mr. Grimwood, the owner, by the way, was a gentleman who was
considerably more feared than loved in the village.

"We could earn some money for the mortgage-box," went on Teddy, as
nobody made any reply.

"Why, Teddy, what a splendid ideal!" cried Eileen, suddenly taking his
suggestion seriously.

"You never would do such a thing as that!" exclaimed Nora. "He would
snap your head off."

"Cheek, I call it," said Frank; "fancy even thinking of such a thing!"

"Cheek or no cheek," said Teddy, "if Eileen is game, we'll do it! You
kids can stop outside the gates while we go up and ask."

[Illustration: "HULLO!" HE SAID. "WHAT DO YOU WANT?"]

But Nora and Frank, though they strongly disapproved, had no intention
of being left out of anything. Three minutes later the four youngsters
presented themselves at the door of The Laurels. Their knock was
answered, as it chanced, by Mr. Grimwood himself, who happened to be in
the hall.

"Hullo!" he said, in a voice far from encouraging. "What do you want?"

He knew the children very well by sight, but as young people were not
in his line, he had never cultivated their acquaintance.

"Please," said Teddy, feeling rather small, "we—we wondered if you
would like us to do a day's gardening."

Mr. Grimwood was somewhat taken aback. As a matter of fact, a gardener
was just what he was needing. The man he usually employed had left him
a few weeks previously, and he had difficulty in finding another.

"What do you mean?" he inquired gruffly, looking from Teddy to the
others. "I don't want any of your impudence!"

Then Eileen spoke—Eileen, with her pretty blue eyes, which were her
chief beauty, raised half-pleadingly to his face. Few could resist the
Bannister children. They were full of faults, it is true, but their
winning dispositions gained them friends everywhere.

"Please, Mr. Grimwood," she said, "it isn't meant for impudence. We
would love to do a day's gardening if you would let us, and we'd only
charge a very little."

"H'm," said Mr. Grimwood, "and that little a good deal more than you're
worth."

But he was thinking over the suggestion all the same. After some
further conversation, to the delight of Eileen and Teddy, and to the
disgust of Nora and Frank, he agreed to employ them; and if they did
the work satisfactorily, to pay them two shillings each at four o'clock.



CHAPTER IV.

Busy Gardeners.

"I'LL show you what I want you to do, and then I will leave you to your
work."

With these words Mr. Grimwood led the way to the lawn on the right side
of the house, where there were three large overgrown flower-beds. Here
flourished flowers and weeds together in the friendliest of fashions.

"I've been away," he said, "or these beds would have been looked after
properly. I don't trouble much about the rest of the garden."

Although Mr. Grimwood did not say so, the three flower-beds had once
been the pride and delight of his wife, whom he had lost several years
previously.

"I suppose you know a flower from a weed?" he said, after giving
several directions.

"I should just think we do, sir," replied Frank, whom he chanced to
address. And so said all the others.

"If you have cleared these beds of weeds before four o'clock—you
needn't kill yourselves with hard work, you know—you can start on
weeding the paths." Mr. Grimwood was actually beginning to look quite
pleasant, and the young people found themselves losing their fears of
him.

"So we will, sir," said Teddy. "Pity we haven't got a man to help us;
we could do no end of work then."

Mr. Grimwood thought awhile.

"Well," said he, "if you can get a man to help you, I don't mind, so
long as he is honest and respectable. By-the-by, what about your lunch?"

"Oh, we brought it with us," said Eileen; "we meant to picnic out
somewhere to-day. So you needn't trouble, thank you all the same."

Mr. Grimwood smiled in half-amused fashion, for he had no intention of
inviting his young gardeners in to lunch.

Soon after this, having told them where the tools were kept, he left
them to their work. Nora and Frank, now looking upon it in the light
of an adventure, began to enjoy themselves, and the four children gave
themselves whole-heartedly, and lightheartedly too, to the task before
them. The idea of earning money for the mortgage-box lent it a charm
which otherwise it might not have possessed.

By lunch-time they were very hungry, and it was not long before
sandwiches, cakes, apples, and home-made lemonade had all vanished. It
was then that Nora, feeling that she had done enough gardening to last
her a month, made a suggestion.

"Don't you think it would be a good plan," said she, "to get a man to
help us for the afternoon? Some one might be glad of the job."

Eileen, who was a bit tired, thought it a very good idea, and, with the
approval of the others, presently started off to try to find a man in
the village.

The first person she chanced to meet, not far from the gates of The
Laurels, was Mr. Charlton. And after a friendly greeting on both sides,
Eileen told him the story.

"Why shouldn't I do?" he asked, with a twinkle of fun in his eyes.
"I'm not very much of a gardener, it is true, but I'm honest and
respectable; and, what is more, I'll work for nothing."

"Oh, Mr. Charlton," cried Eileen, "it would be just splendid of you, if
you would—do you really mean it?"

"Of course I do. I was only going out for a lonely walk, and I can
assure you an hour or two of gardening would suit me far better."

[Illustration: THEY MADE THEIR WAY TO THE SHADY SPOT.]

With this he turned back with Eileen, and together they made their
way to the shady spot where the little girl had left her brothers and
sister.

Meanwhile she was just aching to know if he had accepted her story and
little sketches, but felt that she dared not ask the question.

Teddy, Nora, and Frank stared with amazement when Eileen returned with
Mr. Charlton and introduced him as their helper for the afternoon.

"He's going to do it all for nothing too," she said presently, with the
greatest glee, when Mr. Charlton by his friendly manner had made the
youngsters all feel at ease with him.

"It's most awfully good of you, Mr. Charlton," said Teddy, "but—but I'm
afraid it's troubling you."

"Not at all; I shall quite enjoy it," was the reply. "Our old gardener
at home used to say I didn't know a weed from a 'wegetable marrer,' but
I think I've improved since then."

The children laughed at this.

"Fancy an editor doing gardening," said Nora. Her idea of an editor
being some one who was far too learned and wise to care about digging
and hoeing.

"Why not?" he said with a smile. "Ah, that reminds me," he added
quickly (here he turned to Eileen), "I've something to say to you. I
shall be very pleased to use your little story and sketches in the
children's pages of 'Sunny Hours;' they are really quite good."

Eileen flushed positively crimson with delight.

"Oh, Mr. Charlton!" she gasped; she could scarcely believe her ears.
"How simply 'lovely!'"

"Glad you are pleased," said he, smiling into the radiant little face.
"Go on as you have begun, and one day, who knows? You may do ever so
well."

It was fully five minutes before the excitement caused by Mr.
Charlton's announcement had died down; Teddy, Nora, and Frank being
nearly as proud and pleased as Eileen herself.

After this, the five gardeners prepared to set to work, watched, little
as they knew it, by a pair of curious eyes from the window of the house.

Mr. Grimwood had gone into the neighbouring town on business, and was
not expected home till later in the afternoon.

Eileen, towards three o'clock, was hoeing in a part of the garden some
distance from the others, and was hidden from them by tall rows of
scarlet runners.

Suddenly she heard a voice behind her, which gave her quite a start.

"Hullo! I've been watching you for ever so long from the window!"

Eileen turned around, and, standing close by she saw a lad of about
Teddy's age, with a face so discontented and miserable that her heart
filled with pity.

"Hullo!" she said in answer. "And who are you, pray?"

Her smile was so winning that the boy almost smiled too—but not quite.

"I'm Dick Woodbridge," he answered, "if you want to know; and what's
your name?"

"I'm Eileen Bannister," said the girl; "so now we are properly
introduced. Where did you come from?" she added. "I never heard your
footsteps."

"No; I slipped around quietly, because I didn't want to speak to any
one but you."

Dick Woodbridge, although Eileen did not realize it, was inclined to be
both shy and unsociable.

"Why?" she queried in surprise.

"Because I like the look of you best of them all. You aren't so pretty
as that other girl—your sister, I suppose—but you've got a nice sort of
'understanding' face. How came you all here gardening like this?"

Then Eileen explained, the lad so far forgetting his own troubles,
whatever they were, as to feel quite interested. Eileen told him about
the mortgage-box, at which Dick really "did" smile.

"Fancy you kids thinking of earning money enough to pay off a
mortgage," said he; "you must be a green lot!"

Eileen flushed a little, not quite liking his tone, but she went on
pleasantly. "Now I've told you something about ourselves," she said, "I
think you might say who 'you' are, and where you came from."

"I've told you my name once," was the rather sullen answer; "I'm to
live here for good, or at least till father and mother come back from
India. Uncle Nat—old Grimwood, you know—is my guardian; my other one
has just died. I liked him most awfully, but I hate Uncle Nat. I only
came yesterday, and I wish I'd never seen the place; the house is like
a prison."

"Perhaps," said Eileen gently, "you'll like it better as time goes on."

"No, I shan't!" (This almost fiercely). "I shall hate it worse. If only
I could live with mother and dad, but they say the climate would kill
me. I'm pretty sure this hole of a place will."

"No, no, it won't," was Eileen's soothing reply; "I expect we shall all
be friendly with you, and then you won't feel so lonely."



CHAPTER V.

Taken in Charge.

AT the prospect of a friendship with the Bannister family, Dick's face
brightened.

"I should like it very much," said he, "if you think your father and
mother won't mind. Some people won't have anything to do with me after
they have known me a little while."

Eileen thought it best to take no notice of this latter statement.
"Father is in America," she said, "and mother—"

"Yes, your mother?" this as Eileen hesitated.

"Mother is—dead," she replied softly and reverently.

The boy looked sympathetic.

"Oh, that's hard luck for you," he said.

"Yes," answered Eileen, blinking away a sudden tear (she hoped Dick had
not seen it); "we miss her ever so much: she was so lovely and so dear.
But somehow we feel," she went on, the sunny expression coming back
into her face, "that she isn't so very far away, and for her sake, we
try to do what is right, so as to please her, you know."

Eileen spoke truly; the gentle influence of the mother who was with God
was like a golden thread in each young life.

Dick was quiet after this for fully a minute; he was more touched
than he cared to show. He seemed to see himself as he was—selfish and
wayward—and then as he would like to be. Unconsciously his young soul
had received an upward lift.

"We've got the dearest dad in the world," said Eileen next. And she
was just about to give Dick further details of the family history,
when they were joined by Teddy and Nora. Shortly after this, the
introductions became general, and Dick so far forgot his shyness as to
become quite sociable.

Mr. Charlton—who, it was plain to see, had a way with young
people—presently suggested that Dick should help in the weeding, which
the lad was only too willing to do.

When Mr. Grimwood returned home shortly before four o'clock to find six
gardeners at work, he was a little taken aback. But the results were
far too satisfactory for him to make any complaint.

Mr. Charlton explained his presence there in pleasant, easy fashion.
And Mr. Grimwood, discovering in him—after a few questions—the son of
an old acquaintance, became quite affable.

Punctually on the stroke of four, the Bannister children received
their earnings, in addition to which, to their delight, Mr. Grimwood
presented them with half a crown.

"Which was only right," declared Teddy, after the good-byes had been
said, "considering he got Mr. Charlton's help for nothing."

And so the first money for the mortgage-box was earned. And, what was
better still, that day a seed had been sown in a self-willed young
heart which was destined to bring forth fruit in the days to come.

It could not be said that Mrs. Weston approved of the day's gardening.
But so pleased were the children with the fruit of their work, that
she could not find it in her heart to scold very much. And something
happened in a day or so which put the incident in the background.

Teddy was taken in charge by a stalwart policeman!

It happened in this way. Teddy had gone on an errand for Mrs. Weston
into the neighbouring town of Chelsford, the others amusing themselves
in the garden; and the August afternoon being very warm, he did not
hurry homeward.

On his return, in rather a lonely part of the road, he met Dick
Woodbridge. Dick's face wore a sullen and clouded look, as though
everything had gone wrong with him. As it chanced, that day he had
received a severe reprimand from his uncle for not speaking the exact
truth.

[Illustration: HE FLUNG THE STONE WITH ALL HIS MIGHT.]

"Hullo, old chap," said Teddy, as they drew near to one another, "where
are you going?"

"Nowhere in particular," answered Dick, his face lightening a bit at
the cheery greeting.

"Then you'd better come along home with me," went on Teddy, "and I'll
show you my rabbits; I've got some beauties."

"I'd like to awfully," replied Dick; "I've got nothing else to do."

So the matter was settled. Five minutes later the lads came to
a turning where four roads met, and standing facing them was a
fire-alarm, the scarlet of its paint glowing fiercely in the sun.

"I wonder," said Dick, a sudden thought striking him, "how near I could
throw a stone at the glass without breaking it."

"Take my advice, and don't attempt it," said sensible Teddy; "you might
smash it, you know."

Dick, heedless of the warning, stooped down and picked up a large-sized
stone from the road.

"Don't be such a silly young donkey!" cried Teddy. "You'll get into
no end of trouble if you 'do' break the glass. Mr. Grimwood—he's the
magistrate here—can be awfully severe when he likes, and there have
been two or three false alarms lately."

At the mention of his uncle's name Dick's lips took an obstinate curve.

"I tell you, I 'will' do it, if only to spite him, and, what's more,
I'll call up the fire-engine."

So saying, he flung the stone with all his might. An instant later
there fell on their ears a sound of broken glass.

Then, true to his word, the headstrong lad went deliberately forward
and set the machinery in motion for calling up the fire-engine.

"You've gone and done it now," said Teddy, looking angry and startled.
"What are you going to say for yourself when you are found out?"

"I don't mean to be found out," answered Dick, now frightened at what
he had done. And, without another word, he turned and ran homewards as
fast as he could.

Teddy gave a whistle of dismay, and, as he had no wish to be mixed up
with the affair, decided that he too would make for home as soon as
possible.

Five minutes had scarcely passed before he heard the sound of a
clanging bell—already the fire-engine (the station being near by) was
speeding on its journey.

The funny side of things struck Teddy at this moment, and he could not
repress a grin. What a story it would be to tell the others!

But Teddy, as it happened, was not destined to get home yet awhile.
On and on he walked, hurrying a little in his eagerness to tell the
tale to his brothers and sisters. Suddenly, however, he heard a loud,
peremptory call from behind him.

"Hi, there, you youngster, stop!"

Teddy turned to see a policeman racing towards him on his bicycle.

In a few minutes the man in blue was by his side. Hurriedly
dismounting, he laid a heavy hand on Teddy's shoulder.

"I've caught you at last, young man," said he, in by no means an
agreeable tone of voice. "Now what have you got to say for yourself?"

"What do you mean?" said Teddy, answering the policeman's question by
another.

"It's all very fine to pretend you don't know," was the reply. "That's
the third time you've called up the fire-engine for nothing. Third time
lucky—at least for me."

"I've had nothing whatever at all to do with it," declared the boy, but
he whitened a little under his tan.

"Don't tell me no lies, now." The constable's tone was fierce; he was
a new-comer to the neighbourhood, and knew little if anything of the
Bannister family. "I want the truth."

"Well, you've got it." Teddy was beginning to feel angry as well as
frightened. "You had better be careful, I think, what you're saying."

There was no look of guilt in Teddy's honest blue eyes, but, as P.C.
Jones said to himself, "You can't always judge by appearances."

"H'm, if 'you' didn't do it," said he, "perhaps you can tell me who
did?"

It was on the tip of Teddy's tongue to say, but he suddenly pulled
himself up. Tale-telling was not a weakness of the Bannister boys and
girls.

"Ho, I've caught you there," said the man, seeing Teddy's hesitation;
"of course you can't tell me, seeing it was yourself! Now you come
along with me; and you'd better mind your p's and q's, or you'll spend
the night in jail."

"Rubbish!" said Teddy defiantly. "They don't put boys my age in prison."

"We shall see what Mr. Grimwood says about that," was the curt reply;
"now, then, come along."

Teddy, feeling very sorry for himself, decided it was no use to do
otherwise than obey.

Together he and P.C. Jones marched along the lonely road, then on
through the village street straight up to The Laurels.



CHAPTER VI.

Confession.

"IS Mr. Grimwood at home?"

Hannah, the maid servant who opened the door of The Laurels in answer
to the constable's important knock, eyed both him and his youthful
charge with some curiosity, as she replied:

"Yes, but he is engaged just now; however, if you want to see him
particular. I'll tell him."

The policeman stated that his business "was" particular, and, at
Hannah's bidding, he and Teddy stepped inside the hall.

The maid, recognizing in the lad one of the young gardeners of a few
days previously, mentally wondered what was wrong. But her curiosity
was not destined to be satisfied just then.

Within a short space of time P.C. Jones and his prisoner were ushered
into the dining-room, where sat Mr. Grimwood and—to Teddy's relief—Mr.
Charlton. Somehow he felt that in Mr. Charlton he would find a friend.
A few words from the constable explained the situation; and Mr.
Grimwood, having listened intently to all he had to tell, then turned
to Teddy, and asked him in a very severe tone of voice what he had to
say for himself.

"Please, sir," said Teddy, facing his judge bravely, although something
of his healthy colour had faded, "it isn't true—not a word of it; I
didn't do it!"

"I don't believe you," was the sharp retort; "boys nowadays don't know
how to speak the truth."

Teddy next looked with an appealing glance at Mr. Charlton.

"You—you believe me," he said, "don't you?"

"Yes, Teddy," was the reply, "I do."

"Thank you, sir," was all the boy said, but a rush of tears suddenly
dimmed his eyes.

These, however, he checked manfully. Mr. Grimwood, not best pleased at
the interruption, then proceeded.

"Look here, Bannister," said he, "three times lately the fire brigade
has been called up owing to false alarms, and I have vowed I will make
an example of the culprit when found out. But owing to your youth, and
out of consideration for your family, I will temper justice with mercy.
If you will confess straight out your share in the matter, I will look
over it this once."

"I can't confess, sir," said Teddy in distress, "because I didn't do
it—really and truly."

"But the constable says you were seen near the spot just about the time
it happened."

Teddy was silent, this being only too true.

"May 'I' ask one or two questions, Mr. Grimwood?" here spoke Mr.
Charlton courteously.

"Yes, if you wish," was the somewhat curt response.

"Teddy," the boy's heart warmed at the kindliness of Mr. Charlton's
tone, "were you alone all the while this afternoon?"

Teddy flushed. "No, sir," he answered, "I wasn't."

"Who was with you?"

"Please," said Teddy, "I would rather not say. I am going to 'make' him
speak up for himself."

"Then you are shielding somebody?"

"Y—yes," faltered Teddy.

"Who is it?" Mr. Grimwood rapped out the question. "I'll have none of
this nonsense, please."

Teddy set his lips firmly—he could be very obstinate if he chose.

"You don't mean to tell me?" The tone was awesome enough to frighten a
stouter heart than Teddy's. But, all the same, he stood his ground.

Mr. Grimwood began to wonder for the first time whether the policeman
had not made a mistake.

[Illustration: DICK, WHITE AND TREMBLING, ENTERED THE ROOM.]

Just as he was about to speak again, the dining-room door, which had
been left ajar, was suddenly thrown wide open, and Dick, white to the
lips and trembling from head to foot, entered the room. He had been
playing the part of listener.

Mr. Grimwood looked at him sharply.

"What are you here for?" he said. "I didn't send for you."

"No, but I just 'had' to come," said Dick in a quivering voice,
"because—because—it was not Teddy who did it. I—I—"

"Go on, please!" Mr. Grimwood's tone cut like a knife.

"I did it, Uncle Nat; Teddy will tell you how it happened."

Teddy, feeling immensely relieved, and seeing also that Dick was too
upset to tell the tale himself, spoke out freely, begging at the same
time that Dick might be forgiven.

For a moment or so Mr. Grimwood was silent. He was feeling bitterly
disappointed in his sister's son. Then he turned to the policeman.

"You may go, Jones," said he; "you did your duty, and I commend you.
The matter can now rest in my hands."

And P.C. Jones, with a respectful bow and an apologetic glance in
Teddy's direction, left the room.

"I beg your pardon, Bannister," said Mr. Grimwood (it was a great deal
for him to say); "it appears that Mr. Charlton knows you better than I
do. As for you, Dick—" (here he turned to his young nephew), "I shall
have more to say to you later on."


The punishment which was meted out to Dick was pretty severe, but that
which hurt him most of all was the cut which he received from the
Bannister boys and girls the next time they met.

The day which followed this slight, Mr. Charlton chanced to come across
the lad, lying full length on the grassy sward near the head of the
cliffs, crying bitterly. It was in a lonely part, and Dick had not
reckoned upon any one seeing his tears. His face was hidden in his
hands, and his whole frame was shaking with sobs.

"Why, Dick," said Mr. Charlton (the boy had not heard his footsteps),
"whatever is the matter, old chap?"

They were the first kind words that Dick had heard for days. For a
moment or so the boy looked angry and sullen, not feeling best pleased
at being thus caught. However, he could not resist the kindliness in
the questioner's eyes.

"Everything's . . . the . . . matter," said the boy brokenly. "The
Bannisters won't have anything to do with me now, and I—I haven't got a
f—friend in the world."

"There I think you're wrong." Mr. Charlton here sat down beside the lad
and laid his hand upon his shoulder. "If you will have me, I shall be
only too pleased to be your friend."

"Do you really mean it?" cried Dick, a sudden light coming into his
tear-stained eyes. "It's—it's most awfully good of you! I'm afraid you
won't want me for a friend long though," he added, the cloud coming
into his face again; "I'm bad all through."

"Not quite all through, I think," was the reply. "You want to be
different, don't you?"

"Yes, oh, you don't know how I long to be good; I hate being what I am!"

"That's the first step," said Mr. Charlton encouragingly. "Now, what
you must do is to ask your Captain to come and take control of the
ship. It's plain to see you can't manage it yourself."

"What do you mean?" asked Dick, looking puzzled.

Then Mr. Charlton explained his meaning, the words that he said sinking
down deeply into the young undisciplined heart.

"With Christ for your Captain, my boy," he finished, "you can never
come to shipwreck; only you must take Him on board at once—delays are
dangerous, you know."

"I'll ask Him to-night," replied Dick, in a voice which trembled with
feeling, "and—and I'll never forget what you've said."

Shortly after this, the conversation drifted into other channels, and
later on—Dick feeling that he had found a friend indeed—the two parted.



CHAPTER VII.

A Narrow Escape.

IT was Mr. Charlton's intention to act as peacemaker between Dick and
the Bannister children, but, after all, his services were not required.

"Teddy," said Eileen one morning, about two or three days after the
boy's unpleasant experience of being taken in charge, "I think it was
rather mean of us to cut Dick as we did; he owned up, and he couldn't
do more than that."

"So he ought to own up," replied Teddy grumpily. He was still feeling
sore. "He had no right to run off in that way, leaving the blame to
fall on me."

"But he didn't know you were going to be blamed for it," said Eileen,
"or perhaps he wouldn't have done it."

"H'm," muttered Teddy; "it's all very well for you to talk; you didn't
have to face old Grimwood as I did."

"Well, it's all over now," put in Frank; "I think Eileen is right."

"I don't," said Nora; "I think Teddy is right. I vote we don't have
anything more to do with him."

But Eileen held her ground.

"I don't believe mother would have liked us to be disagreeable to
him," she said in a soft little voice; "she was so gentle and kind to
everybody."

A subdued look came into Nora's pretty little face, and the crossness
died out of Teddy's eyes as by magic.

"Perhaps you are right," he said after a short pause; "it 'was' rather
nasty of us to cut him dead as we did."

"Yes," said Nora thoughtfully; "I fancy you 'are' right after all,
Eileen."

"I'm sure she is," decided Frank; "now the next thing we've got to do
is to make it up with him."

To this they presently all agreed. The golden thread of influence was
shining brighter than they knew.

Little did the four children think under what circumstances they were
next to meet Dick Woodbridge.

Their conversation, which was taking place in the hall shortly after
breakfast, was here interrupted by Mrs. Weston.

"Boys," said she, "Mike Dennis is at the side door, and he wants to
know whether you would like a ride on his pony."

"Rather!" said Teddy. "What say you, Frank?"

"Rather!" echoed Frank delightedly.

Mike Dennis was the son of a farmer who lived near by, and he and the
Bannister boys and girls were capital friends. He had several times
before lent them his pony. In a few seconds, the four children were
interviewing Mike at the side door.

"Joey's a bit fresh this morning, Teddy, old chap," said Mike after a
little chat; "so don't touch him with a whip."

Teddy promised both for himself and Frank.

And presently Mike, after a few further instructions, went into the
village.

In half an hour's time Joey the pony was brought round to the front
door by one of the farm lads. By nature he was gentle as a lamb, and
Mrs. Weston watched her four young charges depart without a single
qualm as to any harm coming to them.

Teddy was the first to mount when they reached the meadow close by. "As
he's a bit fresh," he said, "perhaps it is as well that I should work
off some of his friskiness." Which he did, to his great enjoyment.

Afterwards came Frank's turn, and Joey proved as good as gold, trotting
or cantering round the field at his rider's will.

Then Nora declared that she meant to have a ride. And as she was
fairly at home in Joey's saddle, having ridden him several times, the
boys agreed to let her have her way. And Eileen, bidding her be very
careful, helped her to mount.

[Illustration: THE PONY WAS MAKING STRAIGHT FOR THE LEVEL CROSSING.]

All went well until the little girl drew near the gate which opened on
to the road. Here two young urchins were watching her with interest. As
she passed, one of the boys gave a loud shout.

"Hip, hip, hooray!" he yelled. "There's a fine circus-rider for you!"

"Hip, hip, hooray!" cried the other.

The sudden noise startled Joey so much, that he perked up his ears and
took a rush forward. Had not Nora been sitting pretty firmly, she must
have been thrown.

"Stop, Joey, stop!" she panted. But her words were spoken in vain.

Joey galloped on and on, to the dismay of all the onlookers, the
culprits included. Nora herself was thoroughly frightened.

"Sit tight!" shouted Teddy. "He'll quiet down presently."

But Joey did not soon quiet down. Galloping through one meadow, he made
his way into the next, the gate of which stood wide open.

Well indeed might Nora now be afraid, for the pony was making straight
for the level crossing of the railway. By this time he was beginning to
slacken speed as though the race was tiring him out. Nevertheless on
and on he went, until he had planted his feet right in the middle of
the railway track. Here he stopped trembling as with fear—on the summer
air there had fallen the shrill whistle of an oncoming train! Nora sat
as one paralysed with fright, powerless to move.

A loud cry rang out from close by.

"Jump off! Can't you hear the train coming!"

It was Dick Woodbridge who shouted the words. He had been rambling
aimlessly along by the railway, when he suddenly caught sight of Nora's
peril.

He did not wait to see the effect of his words. With rapid strides he
dashed on to the metals, and, seizing Joey's bridle, he dragged both
pony and rider into safety. A moment or two later the train thundered
by.

Nora by this time had dismounted, and was in a flood of hysterical
tears.

"Oh, Dick—Dick," she sobbed out the words, "whatever 'should' I have
done but for you?"

"That's all right," said Dick awkwardly; "you've nothing to cry about
now."

But, all the same, Nora went on crying helplessly. And Dick was
thoroughly glad and relieved when presently they were joined by Eileen,
Teddy, and Frank.

A few broken sentences from Nora explained what had happened, and Dick
was quite abashed at the praise which he received.

Eileen, looking very white at the thought of her sister's narrow
escape, could scarcely speak at first for tears.

"Dick, you are simply splendid," she faltered out; "we—we can never
thank you enough for what you have done."

"I jolly well wish we could do something for you in return, old chap,"
here put in Teddy; and the friendliness of his tone went straight to
Dick's heart.

It was Frank, however, who hit upon exactly the right words to say.

"We'll be chums after this, won't we?" he said, looking first at Dick
and then at Teddy and his sisters, and his words met with general
approval.

Thus came about a friendship between Dick and the Bannister family, a
friendship which grew by leaps and bounds.



CHAPTER VIII.

Dick's Letter.

HAPPY days followed for the Bannister children and their friend Dick.
There were trips on the sea, picnics on shore, and rambles in the
woodlands and meadows. In nearly all their pleasures, Mr. Charlton
had a share, and the youngsters little guessed how largely they were
contributing to the enjoyment of his holiday.

Before he left Hazlenook, he had the pleasure of presenting the little
authoress with a cheque for her story and sketches, with a promise that
they should appear in due time in the magazine.

Eileen's pride and delight knew no bounds, and the cheque, which
was promptly cashed, swelled the amount which was already in the
mortgage-box in quite a handsome fashion.

It was on a certain sunny afternoon in September that Mr. Charlton very
regretfully bade good-bye to his young friends, for friends they had
become now in very truth.

"We seem to have known you for ever so long, Mr. Charlton," said
Eileen, on the way to the railway station.

The Bannister boys and girls, and Dick also, had arranged to give him a
good send-off.

"We shall miss you ever so much; you have been most awfully good to us,
and we shan't forget it." And so said Nora, who was walking by Eileen's
side.

The three boys were just at this moment a few steps behind.

"You have done as much for me as I have for you," replied Mr. Charlton,
"and perhaps more."

"I don't see how that's possible," replied Eileen; "I only wish that
there was something you 'specially' wanted that we could do for you."

Mr. Charlton's face looked serious—his thoughts had travelled far away.

"There is something," said he presently, "that I 'very' specially want,
but it's nothing that any of you could do for me."

At this moment the boys chanced to overtake them, and the conversation
became general.

Mr. Charlton was not sorry, for Eileen had unconsciously awakened
sad memories. However, he soon cast all troubled thoughts aside, and
entered into the children's chat with the usual ready interest he had
shown in all they did.

Upon their arrival at the station, Dick looked so glum that Mr.
Charlton seized an opportunity to have a few words alone with him.

"Cheer up, Dick, old man," said he kindly, knowing that the boy was
feeling rather badly about the parting; "it isn't good-bye for ever,
you know."

"I know that," mumbled Dick gruffly, for Mr. Charlton had promised that
he would pay Hazlenook another visit at his earliest opportunity, "but
you don't know how I shall miss you, sir. You've been such a real good
friend to me."

"And I shall miss you too—all of you," said Mr. Charlton. "You won't
forget, Dick, my boy," he added in an undertone, "the little chat we
had together, you and I, about your Captain, and mine—remember He is
always within call."

The boy flushed as he answered, "I won't forget, sir."

Here came a discussion about the luggage, and a few minutes later Mr.
Charlton took his seat in the train. And after repeated good-byes and
many hand-shakes, he was carried away towards the busy city, refreshed
and strengthened for work again.


That self-same evening Dick sat down to write a long letter to his
parents in India, a letter which was destined to help the Bannister
family more than he knew. He began:

   "DEAR FATHER AND MOTHER,—

   "I've got such a lot to tell you, that I scarcely know what is the best
thing to say first.

   "I'm ever so much happier here than I thought I should be. Uncle Nat is
a lot kinder than he looks, and his bark is worse than his bite.

  "And, besides this, I have made friends with the Bannister family, who
live near by at The Gables. I like them ever so much. They are saving
up money towards paying off a mortgage which is on their house. I only
wish I could help them: do you think I can?

   "If it isn't paid by Christmas, they will have to leave their pretty
house, and they will feel it so.

   "Next week school begins; and as Teddy and Frank Bannister go to the
same school, Chelsford College, as I am going to, I expect we shall
have some ripping times.

   "The girls, Eileen and Nora, begin school on the same day. Their
teacher is our head master's daughter. They are all just like my
brothers and sisters, and often, when I am not at the Bannister's
house, they are up here at The Laurels, and Uncle Nat seems to like it—"

Next followed details of the lad's life, the letter closing with a
glowing account of Mr. Charlton, to whom Dick's boyish heart had gone
out in affection.

[Illustration: DICK SAT DOWN TO WRITE A LONG LETTER TO HIS PARENTS.]

After this, the lengthy epistle was folded and put into an envelope and
posted.


Several happy weeks of school life passed away, and the half-term's
holiday drew near. Frank had now given up his soldiering on the village
green, much to the old shoemaker's regret, and, with Teddy and Dick,
had joined the Boy Scouts. He still treasured, however, the three
stripes given to him by Henderson, and the two were as good friends as
ever, the old man having a chat with him when he passed that way.

The boys had made so many arrangements with their fellow Scouts for the
half-term, that but for the fact that Eileen and Nora had been invited
to London to spend the short holiday with a relative, Miss Silver by
name, they would have felt considerably out of it.

As it was, they were highly delighted, for never before had they stayed
in town. Indeed they felt quite adventurous when the time came for
them to take their journey. At Hazlenook Station they were placed in
the care of the guard. Miss Silver—or Cousin Margaret, as they called
her—had promised to meet them at Liverpool Street. So Mrs. Weston had
no anxiety whatever on their behalf.



CHAPTER IX.

Cissie Vane.

IN Miss Silver's Sunday-school class was a little girl of the name of
Cissie Vane. She was a motherless bairn, who, sad to say, was generally
in somebody's way. In the bygone times, which had so nearly faded
away from Cissie's memory, she had been as happy as the day was long.
She and her father had lived together in the country (her mother had
died when Cissie was a tiny mite), and there Mr. Vane had painted his
pictures, the sale of which just kept the little home going and the
wolf from the door.

But all this was changed. Her father, unfortunately for Cissie, married
again, soon after which he seemed to lose interest in his work. His
health, too, failed him, and on Cissie's ninth birthday—she was at this
time eleven years of age—she was left fatherless.

Her step-mother was a woman of quick, impatient temper, and was by no
means always kind. Their home was now in a poor London street, where
Mrs. Vane eked out her living by taking lodgers, Cissie proving very
helpful in the house.

The little girl's first meeting with Miss Silver happened thus. Cissie,
feeling very lonely one Sunday afternoon, made her way by chance to a
Sunday-school in a street near by. At a word of invitation she took
her place amongst a class of little girls, and the lesson she had
interrupted was then continued.

"Now, children," said the lady at the close, "you may ask me any
questions that you like, only we must talk softly so as not to disturb
the others."

She smiled so sweetly as she spoke, that Cissie's little heart quite
warmed within her, and it was she who, in spite of being a new-comer,
put the first question.

"Please," she said, "what is your name?"

The voice was both gentle and refined, for the little girl had not
caught the accent of the children of the neighbourhood.

The lady, who had expected some question about the Bible story, was a
little surprised, but she answered very kindly all the same.

"My name is Margaret Silver," she said; "and what is yours, may I ask?"

"Mine," was the reply, "is Cissie Vane—I like your name best; I shall
call you my 'Pretty Lady,' and come to your class again, if you'll let
me."

The child meant no impertinence it was easy to see. She had simply
fallen in love with her teacher. It was little wonder, for Margaret
Silver was as sweet as she was beautiful. She in her turn was attracted
to Cissie, the bright little face, framed with curly brown hair, being
very winsome.

Cissie kept her promise with regard to coming again, and the friendship
between teacher and pupil grew very rapidly.


About a couple of months after Cissie's first appearance at the
Sunday-school a very exciting thing happened in her home. The child
awoke one night to find the room—a small attic at the top of the
house—in which she slept half full of smoke. Frightened, she made her
way into the passage, and there she realized an alarming fact—the house
was on fire!

As it chanced a little girl, Meggy Smith by name, of about four years
of age, was sleeping in the room next to Cissie's attic. She had been
left in Mrs. Vane's charge a few weeks previously, and Cissie was
devoted to her.

Forgetful of her own danger, she hastened to Meggy's rescue. Quickly
awakening her, she carried the little one, heavy though she was,
towards the staircase. But here the smoke, which was now almost
suffocating, barred their way of escape. The poor children were indeed
in a sorry plight!

[Illustration: THE POOR CHILDREN WERE INDEED IN A SORRY PLIGHT.]

By this time the household was aroused, and efforts were being made to
reach them. But so rapidly was the fire spreading that the efforts were
in vain.

Poor little Meggy was now crying piteously, Cissie meanwhile doing her
best to pacify her.

"Don't cry, Meggy dear," said she as bravely as she could speak,
although she was feeling terribly frightened herself. "We'll stand at
the landing window, and shout for somebody to come and save us."

A few minutes later the two childish forms were seen there from
below—all the other inmates of the house had reached safety—and Cissie,
having flung the window open, cried loudly for help.

Fortunately it was not long in coming; the alarm had already been
given, and the fire-engine and escape were even then on their way.

In a comparatively little while, although it seemed like an age to
Cissie and Meggy, the escape was placed at the window, and one by one
they were taken in safety to the street below.


A happy little party was seated at breakfast at No. 3, Belford Road,
S.W. It consisted of Miss Silver, looking bright and smiling at the
head of the table, Mrs. Mortimer, an elderly relative who lived with
her—Miss Silver had lost her parents some years previously—and Eileen
and Nora.

It was Monday morning. The half-term holiday was nearly over, and the
two girls, who, to use their own words, had had a "perfectly lovely
time," were supposed to be leaving that afternoon for home.

"Girls," said Miss Silver presently, looking up from a letter she was
reading, "are you in a great hurry to go home, or would you like to
stay on with me for another couple of days?"

"Oh," cried Eileen, looking as though such a prospect was too good to
be true, "is there any chance of it, Cousin Margaret?"

"Yes," was the reply, "there is. I took upon myself to write to your
governess—who is an old friend of mine—and also to Mrs. Weston, and
both are willing for you to stay on till Wednesday."

"How simply splendiferous!" exclaimed Eileen in delight; and Nora
echoed her words.

"Now is there anything you would particularly like to do?" said Miss
Silver presently, when the children had expressed their thanks; "we
must make the most of the time, you know."

Eileen and Nora thought awhile, and soon came to the conclusion that
they would like to go to the Zoo.

"So it shall be," said Miss Silver. "Perhaps Mrs. Mortimer would like
to go with us."

But the older lady smiled and shook her head; she preferred a quiet day
at home.

"Some time this afternoon," went on Miss Silver, "I want to go and see
one of my little Sunday-school pupils who is ill. I think we could
manage it on our way home. You two girls can come in with me, if you
like, and have a chat with her too."

"We'd like it very much," replied Eileen. "What is her name, and what
is the matter with her?"

"Her name is Cissie Vane. She is suffering really from severe shock
upon a delicate and ill-fed little frame. And as there was nowhere else
for her to go, she was taken to the hospital. She and another child,
who seems none the worse for her experience, nearly lost their lives in
a fire a few nights ago."

And Miss Silver then told the story as she had heard it from Cissie's
lips.

Both Eileen and Nora were intensely interested, and looked forward to
the day's programme with the keenest delight.

"There is one person I would like to see while we are here," said
Eileen a little later, "and that is Mr. Charlton. He lives in London,
and we know his address."

Miss Silver had already heard much about the editor of "Sunny Hours"
and of his acceptance of Eileen's story and drawings.

"Well, there's no reason why you shouldn't see him," she replied; "that
is, if he has the time to spare. Would you like to send him a few lines
asking him to come to-morrow evening if he is disengaged?"

Eileen was very pleased to do so, and the invitation was duly sent, and
accepted by return of post.

The time spent at the Zoo was perfect from beginning to end, and Miss
Silver, in seeing the children's pleasure, enjoyed it as much as they.

On their way home, as arranged, she and the two girls called at the
hospital, where little Cissie Vane was a patient, and there they found
the child in a great state of distress. The reason was soon given by
Cissie herself, between pitiful sobs which shook her very frame.

On that day her step-mother had been to see her, and had told the
little girl that very shortly she was going to Canada, and that Cissie
would have to find a new home. But where? Ah! That was the question.



CHAPTER X.

The Lost Niece.

"I'VE nowhere to go, and nobody wants me—oh, what shall I do? What
'shall' I do?" Little Cissie sobbed out the words.

And Eileen and Nora, who were both as tenderhearted as could be, were
almost ready to cry for very sympathy.

Miss Silver stooped down and gently kissed the pathetic little face.
"Don't cry, dearie," said she soothingly, "and you mustn't say that
nobody wants you, for 'I' do. As for there being nowhere for you to go,
we'll soon settle that."

Cissie's eyes brightened a little. Somehow, with Miss Silver by her
side, she felt a sense of protection.

"What would you say, Cissie," went on the lady, after a few moments'
thought, "to coming home with me, if sister allows it?"

"Oh, Miss Silver," Cissie looked over-joyed, "do you really, 'really'
mean it?"

"Of course I do; I'll go and speak to Sister Louise" (here naming a
personal friend of her own in the hospital) "at once about it. And
in the meantime, you and my young cousins can be making each others'
acquaintance."

True to her promise, Miss Silver went in search of Sister Louise.

And in a very few minutes, Eileen, Nora, and Cissie were chatting away
in the friendliest of fashions.


After a time Miss Silver returned to Cissie's bedside, every
arrangement for the child's welfare having been satisfactorily made.

"Cissie," said she, "how soon do you think you can get into some
clothes? The matron and sister both think you are well enough to return
home with me now. What do you say to that?"

Cissie looked absolutely delighted, and a scarlet flush of excitement
came into her cheeks.

"How—perfectly lovely!" she said. "I feel just so happy that I want to
cry."

"Little goose!" laughed Miss Silver. But all the same her own eyes were
misty with tears of sympathy.

Before half an hour had elapsed, Cissie, the good-byes to those who had
befriended her in the hospital having been said, found herself seated
in a taxi by Miss Silver's side, Eileen and Nora sitting opposite with
beaming faces.

That evening a bed was made up for the little girl in Miss Silver's
room, the lady supplying all her needs. And there, for the first time
since the fire, she passed a night of calm, unbroken sleep, awaking in
the morning, well on the road to health and strength.

By Miss Silver's orders she was to remain in bed for that day, with the
promise that she should come downstairs on the next if she was very
good.

A letter was sent to Mrs. Vane telling her of Cissie's whereabouts.
The only reply to which was a few brief lines saying that it was well
Cissie had found a friend, as she would be unable to do anything
further for her. From that day forth nothing more was heard of the
little girl's step-mother.

Punctually at six o'clock, the hour Mr. Charlton had appointed for
his call, a knock was heard at the door. He received the kindliest of
welcomes from Miss Silver and Mrs. Mortimer, who had both heard much in
his favour. As for the two girls, they were delighted to see him.

There were so many things to hear and to say, that conversation flowed
very easily.

It was Eileen who later on brought up the subject of the mortgage-box,
Miss Silver having already heard about it.

"I put all the money you gave me for my story and drawings, Mr.
Charlton," said she, "straight into the mortgage-box, but we've given
up trying to earn anything more for it now, it seemed so little use."

"Come, you mustn't be discouraged like that," replied Mr. Charlton,
with a smile. "Why don't you try your hand at another little story and
some more drawings? Maybe I could use them one day."

"I've had no time since school began," said Eileen regretfully, "and
besides, I don't feel as if I had got anything to write about. Oh,
Cousin Margaret—" (here she turned to Miss Silver, a sudden bright
thought striking her), "wouldn't Cissie make an interesting story? May
I tell Mr. Charlton all about her?"

"Certainly you may, dear, if you like," said Miss Silver in her pretty
gentle voice; "that is, if Mr. Charlton would care to hear."

"I should like it very much," was the answer; "Cissie is a favourite
name of mine."

He listened with great interest to the story which followed. It was his
ready sympathy which had made him such a favourite with the Bannister
boys and girls.

[Illustration: HE LISTENED TO THE STORY.]

"Poor little soul!" he said at the close. "It's hard luck for her! But
surely she has some relative who would look after her."

Miss Silver shook her head. "No," said she, "I'm afraid not. Her
father, for some reason or other, seemed to have cut himself adrift
from all his relatives, and Cissie knows nothing about any of them."

"What's her surname?" asked Mr. Charlton. "You haven't told me yet.
Perhaps, I could help you in the matter."

"Vane," replied Miss Silver; "it's rather an uncommon name, and—"

"Vane," was the quick interruption. "Cissie Vane—are you 'quite' sure?"

Mr. Charlton's voice trembled a little as he put the question, and Miss
Silver looked at him in surprise.

"Yes," she answered, "quite sure; she was named after her mother."

"Then," said he, "that settles it!"

There was a note of such joy in his words that his hearers felt a
sudden thrill of excitement.

What did he know about little Cissie Vane?

"Miss Silver," he went on, "this is nothing less than providential.
If what I think and believe is true, this child is my niece—my only
sister's little girl. For years I have been trying to find her
whereabouts, but without success."

At this moment there flashed into Eileen's mind the words Mr. Charlton
had spoken on the day he bade good-bye to them at Hazlenook, and she
instinctively guessed that what he specially wanted had come to pass.
And she was right.

"May I see her, please?" he next asked eagerly.

"Certainly you may," replied Miss Silver, delighted beyond measure at
the turn of affairs.

As for Eileen and Nora, it seemed to them almost too good to be
believed. Mrs. Mortimer's kindly heart, too, was rejoiced.

"I only hope," added the lady, "that for poor little Cissie's sake you
may be right."

A few minutes later Mr. Charlton and Miss Silver were standing by
Cissie's bedside, and in the easiest and friendliest of fashions
the former, having first won the little girl's confidence, began to
question her about her relatives.

Very soon an important fact was in his possession.

"I wonder," he said very gently, Miss Silver having warned him not
to excite the child, "if you can tell me what your mother's name was
before she married your father."

"My own mother, you mean?" asked Cissie.

"Yes," was the reply.

"It was Cissie Charlton; I saw it written in a book in her own
handwriting. Daddy told me it was one that belonged to her."

This was quite enough—the proof was positive.

"Cissie," said Mr. Charlton, his voice not quite under his control,
"you will like to know that I knew and loved your mother very dearly—in
fact, little one, she was my own sister."

"Your own sister!" The pale little face on the pillow suddenly flushed
a rosy red, which soon faded, leaving her whiter than before.

At first she could scarcely grasp all his words implied.

"Is it all—real—true?" she said falteringly, looking from his face into
Miss Silver's kind eyes.

"Yes, dearie," (it was Miss Silver who answered the question), "it is
all real, true."

"Then," said Cissie, turning towards Mr. Charlton again, "you—you are
my own uncle!"

"Yes, I am," was the glad reply, "and I am going to take care of you
from this day forth." And, stooping down, Mr. Charlton kissed his
new-found niece.

Cissie's cup of joy was full to the brim. "Isn't it all wonderful?" she
said presently, "and oh, isn't it kind of God to let it happen like
this?"

To these words both Mr. Charlton and Miss Silver agreed. So rolled
away the clouds from the life of little Cissie Vane, giving place to
heaven's brightest sunshine.



CHAPTER XI.

Frank's Gift.

DICK WOODBRIDGE was spending the Saturday afternoon, which happened
to be a very wet one, with the Bannister boys and girls in the large
playroom at The Gables. Teddy and Frank were inclined to be irritable,
and Eileen had all her work cut out to keep peace between them.

"I say, you two," said Dick presently, seeing that the boys were very
near a quarrel, "do keep your hair on! I've got something to tell you
if you'll only listen."

"What is it?" asked Eileen, feeling very grateful to Dick for his
timely interruption.

"There's a big show coming off at the Shire Hall at Chelsford soon
in aid of the County Hostel for Soldiers, and Uncle Nat is taking no
end of interest in it. He says that everybody ought to give or do
something."

"When is it to be?" asked Nora.

"Oh, in about a fortnight or so, and I've been puzzling my head what to
give. For the life of me, I can't think of anything."

"You might give away those freckles on the tip of your nose without
missing 'em," said Teddy, his temper feeling a bit better.

Dick grinned; he was quite used now to the chaff and fun of his young
companions.

"I know what I can do," said Nora. "I'll send one of my Persian kittens
for sale—the one I don't want to keep."

"Very generous of you," laughed Frank teasingly.

"And you can give Frisky, your fox terrier puppy," went on Nora. "I
dare say he'd sell for something."

"Sell Frisky!" exclaimed Frank. "I think I see myself. Why I wouldn't
part with Frisky for five pounds—no, not for ten!"

"You needn't worry yourself, old chap," here spoke Teddy; "you're not
likely to be offered 'that' for a mongrel like him! I know what I'll
give," he added, "and that is a couple of my rabbits. Between us we
ought to raise something."

The chat had now drifted into quite a smooth channel, and the rest of
the afternoon passed away without any further bickering.


It was about a week later, and Frank was in deep thought. He was alone
in the garden, and a struggle was going on within his heart.

"I wonder," he said to himself, "if I'm a 'very' selfish pig! All the
others have given something to the sale, and I've got nothing to give
except Frisky, and I just simply can't spare the little chap."

At this moment Frisky, as though he knew he was in his master's
thoughts, bounded to Frank's side. The boy stooped down and fondled his
pet.

"You little know," said he, "what I've been thinking about. But there,
I shan't think of it any more. There 'll be plenty of people to give
without me."

But still Frank's mind was not easy. A text his mother had taught him
when he was quite a little fellow kept coming into his mind. "Even
Christ pleased not Himself."

"I hate to be selfish," was his unspoken thought; "only horrid people
are selfish. I suppose I shall have to give him, after all."

Little as Frank realized it, the golden thread of his mother's
influence was leading him into the path of self-sacrifice.

A few days later Frank, owing to a neglected cold, was on the sick
list and under the doctor's care. And so it befell that it was Teddy
who took Frisky (Frank specially wished it, though it was hard to say
good-bye to his pet) to the Shire Hall at Chelsford for sale on behalf
of the hostel.


"Five shillings for a fox terrier!" The auctioneer, Mr. Fleet by name,
looked around the crowded room as he spoke. "Come now, aren't you going
to offer me more than that? I want ten times that amount," he declared,
"not a penny less!"

Frisky, the fox terrier in question, who was perched on a chair near
the speaker, here gave a little yelp as though he too had something to
say upon the subject.

"I reckon, sir, 'want' will have to be your master!" cried a voice from
the audience.

"I think not," replied Mr. Fleet. "Suppose now I tell you the story of
Frisky, this fox terrier. He is the gift of a little lad who prized him
above all his possessions. The tale is true, for I heard it from one
who knows him well."

Dick Woodbridge, as it happened, had told Mr. Fleet all about it.

"He was afraid of being selfish," went on Mr. Fleet, "so he gave of his
best. It isn't every one of us who could say that, is it?

"There is just one thing more I would like you to know, and I'm sure
you will be sorry to hear it—Frisky's little master is lying ill, and
for his sake, as well as for the good cause, I ask you to be liberal."

Scarcely had Mr. Fleet finished speaking than fifty shillings
"were" offered, the bids rising rapidly one after another, until
finally the fox terrier puppy was knocked down to the squire of the
neighbourhood—Sir Matthew Harley—for the sum of five pounds.

He too had given of his best—his son for his country, and a fellow
feeling had made him wondrous kind.

It was just as the bargain was completed that Dick Woodbridge, his face
looking very anxious, entered the room. He had come post haste from The
Gables in order to buy Frisky and restore him to his master, if the
price was not beyond his powers. None of the Bannister children, to
their disappointment, were there on that day, Frank's illness causing a
certain amount of anxiety in the household.

Dick was somewhat taken aback to find that Frisky had already been
sold, and for such a sum, but still he was not hopeless of attaining
his object. Seeking out his Uncle Nat, he made a bold request.

"Please, Uncle Nat," said he, "I want you to lend me five pounds."

"Five pounds!" repeated Mr. Grimwood in surprise. "Whatever for, my
lad?"

Then Dick told him.

"I believe," finished the boy, "that if I could take Frisky back to
Frank, it would do him a power of good. He's quite ill to-day, and the
doctor is half afraid of pneumonia."

Mr. Grimwood looked thoughtful.

"I never lend," said he, "on principle. Besides, how do you know that
Sir Matthew will part with the dog?"

"I don't know," replied Dick, "but I believe he would, for he looks
kind. Uncle Nat," he went on earnestly, "if you won't 'lend' me the
money, may I have five pounds instead of the bicycle you promised me on
my next birthday?"

Mr. Grimwood was surprised, and inwardly very pleased. He had not
expected such unselfishness from Dick, although, as he well knew, the
lad had much improved in character of late.

"Well," he said, after a little consideration, "we'll see what Sir
Matthew has to say about it."

But the Squire, when the request was made, and he had heard the whole
story, shook his head.

"No," he said, "I want that fox terrier for a special purpose."

Dick was now feeling almost in despair. "Oh, 'please,' Sir Matthew,"
cried he, "'do' let me buy him back."

"Suppose—" (there was a kindly twinkle in Sir Matthew's eyes as he
spoke) "I want it for the same purpose as 'you' do."

"Oh, Sir Matthew!" Dick almost gasped in his relief. "Do you really
mean it?"

"Of course I do; I never say what I don't mean. Take the dog, and tell
its master from me I hope he'll soon be better."

Dick was too delighted to express his thanks properly, but he did his
best; Mr. Grimwood also expressing his appreciation of the Squire's
kindness.

Very soon after this Dick was hurrying off to The Gables with Frisky in
his arms.

[Illustration: FRANK'S DELIGHT AT SEEING HIS PET AGAIN WAS ALMOST
TEARFUL.]

Frank's delight at seeing his pet again was almost tearful, for the boy
was feeling both weak and ill. When he heard all there was to tell, he
gripped Dick's hand with all the strength he possessed.

"Dick, old chap," said he, "you're a brick—that's what you are; and so
is Sir Matthew!"

Strange to say, the change for the better in Frank seemed to date from
that time. At least, so said Mrs. Weston and the children.

And the doctor, when he called next day and saw the improvement in his
young patient, declared with a laugh that Frisky had done him more good
than all the medicine in the world.



CHAPTER XII.

Home Again.

CHRISTMAS was drawing near, and the Bannister boys and girls were
bright with anticipation. It was little wonder, for their father was
due to arrive home from America shortly before the festive season. The
actual date was not fixed.

Little Cissie Vane, too, was looking forward to Christmas, for she was
to spend it with Miss Silver, her Uncle Derrick—with whom she had now
made a home—also being an invited guest. The child was a boarder at the
school which Eileen and Nora attended, and was as happy as the day was
long.

Eileen's story and drawings had by this time appeared in "Sunny Hours,"
filling the little authoress with pride and delight and high ambitions
for the future.

"I wish Christmas would hurry and come," said Eileen one morning; "I do
want to see daddy most awfully!"

So echoed the rest!


At last came the breaking-up day at the school, and the youngsters, to
celebrate the beginning of the holidays, decided in the afternoon to
have a winter picnic. This meant tea and hot cakes on the frozen pond
which adjoined the garden. The weather was unusually severe for the
season, and the ice, so the children declared, was as firm as a rock.
Mrs. Weston was quite agreeable to the plan, her only condition being
that they should all wrap up well.

By tea-time a great round moon was riding in the heavens, making the
world well-nigh as light as day. Dick, who of course was one of the
party, entered into the spirit of everything, and was the gayest of the
gay—at least, he was so until a very unfortunate incident took place.

In a venturesome mood, he presently made his way to a certain part of
the ice that was overhung by trees and which the more cautious Teddy
considered doubtful.

He had been there but a few minutes, when there came an ominous sound
of cracking. With all speed Dick was about to leave the spot and join
the others, when the ice suddenly bent beneath his weight, and then
gave way altogether. A cry of fright escaped his lips, another instant
and he had sunk beneath the icy water.

The Bannister children, realizing what had happened, were
terror-stricken. Just as they were hurrying towards the gaping hole in
the ice, a loud and well-remembered voice fell on their ears.

"Keep back—I'm coming!"

It was their father who spoke; none of them, as it happened, had
chanced to hear his footsteps.

Scarcely a word of welcome did he receive. Dick's life was in danger;
even daddy's home-coming was secondary to this!

The boy rose to the surface with a piteous cry for help.

"All right, don't be afraid!" shouted Mr. Bannister. "I'll save you!"

He next managed to place himself full length on the cracking ice,
as near the edge of the hole as possible, and presently—it seemed
like an eternity to the terrified watchers—he caught hold of Dick's
outstretched arm, and by dint of great care drew him towards the firmer
ice.

The relief of the children when the danger was past was so great that
they were nearly ready to cry for joy.

Poor Dick, however, by this time was only half conscious, and Mr.
Bannister, gathering him up into his strong arms, prepared to carry him
to the house, bidding the others to follow.

Mrs. Weston, upon hearing what had happened, wasted no time in talk. It
was she who had told Mr. Bannister on his arrival home where to find
the young people; and well was it for Dick that she had done so.


With all speed Dick's needs received attention. And a messenger was
dispatched to Mr. Grimwood explaining matters, telling him at the
same time that although there was no need for anxiety on his nephew's
behalf, he would not be able to return home that evening.

When Mr. Bannister had changed into dry clothing, and Dick was cosily
tucked up in bed, the warmth of his welcome home more than made up for
his chilly bath.

The delight of the children at once again having their father in their
midst was unbounded, and Mr. Bannister—who had kept the exact time of
his arrival a secret, intending it as a Christmas surprise—had all his
work cut out to answer the questions that were showered upon him.


"I can never thank you enough, sir," said Dick to Mr. Bannister
next morning, "for saving my life yesterday as you did. It was just
'splendid' of you!"

The lad, who was feeling considerably better, though not quite himself,
had insisted upon joining the family at breakfast.

Mr. Bannister looked into Dick's pale face with a very kindly expression
in his eyes.

"Well," said he, "one good turn deserves another, and, little as you
know it, I and these youngsters here have reason to be very grateful to
you. Do you remember,—" he went on, "writing a certain letter to your
father and mother about the mortgage-box and how my boys and girls were
trying to help pay off the debt?"

"Yes," replied Dick, looking very puzzled, "I remember quite well."

Then Mr. Bannister turned to his children, who were eagerly listening,
and, like Dick, greatly puzzled.

"Little did you dream, kiddies," said he, and there was a good deal of
feeling in his tone, "that indirectly your mortgage-box would be the
means of the money being paid, but so it is!"

"Paid—oh, father!" cried Eileen, her eyes bright with joy and wonder.
"Then we shan't have to leave our dear old home after all?"

"Dad, what 'do' you mean?" asked Teddy; and so questioned Nora and
Frank.

Mrs. Weston's kind, motherly face was beaming; she was already in the
secret.

Mr. Bannister hereupon explained how it was that Dick's letter had
brought it all about. His story in brief was this.

A certain Mr. Sutton, a friend of Mr. and Mrs. Woodbridge, and, strange
to say, a friend of the Bannister family also, was present when the
letter was received.

As he was interested in the lad, it was passed on for him to read; the
closely-written epistle, as it proved, giving him much food for thought.

Having reason to be grateful to Mr. Bannister's father for help in
times past, he made up his mind to do something in the matter, and in
the end, through his kindness—for Mr. Sutton was now a very wealthy
man—every penny of the mortgage was paid.

The children could hardly control their excitement at the turn of
affairs.

"Hip, hip, hooray!" shouted Teddy. "Three cheers for Mr. Sutton and for
good old Dick!"

These were given. And Dick, crimson-faced, felt his cup of happiness
full to the brim.

When order was again restored, Mr. Bannister had something more to say.

"There's one thing we mustn't forget, boys and girls," said he (his
voice had now a serious ring in it), "you know whose birthday it is
we are about to keep. We must remember to give Him thanks, who is the
Author and Giver of all good things."

"We won't forget, daddy dear," replied Eileen thoughtfully.

And, to do them justice, none of them did forget.


Christmas morning dawned bright and clear. A covering of snow lay over
the frost-bound earth, wrapping it in a soft, fleecy garment, which
glittered beneath the wintry sun. Well indeed might the world seem a
happy place to the Bannister boys and girls. Their father had come
home, the mortgage was paid, and the Christmas bells were ringing out
their message of peace and goodwill.










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GOLDEN THREAD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


