The Project Gutenberg eBook of Negro myths from the Georgia coast, told in the vernacular
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Negro myths from the Georgia coast, told in the vernacular

Author: LL. D. Jr. Charles C. Jones

Release date: July 29, 2025 [eBook #76586]

Language: English

Original publication: Columbia: The State Company, 1925

Credits: Carol Brown, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEGRO MYTHS FROM THE GEORGIA COAST, TOLD IN THE VERNACULAR ***





                               NEGRO MYTHS

                                  FROM

                            THE GEORGIA COAST

                         TOLD IN THE VERNACULAR

                                   BY

                      CHARLES C. JONES, JR., LL. D.

                             COLUMBIA, S. C.
                            THE STATE COMPANY
                                  1925




                                IN MEMORY

                                   OF

                         MONTE VIDEO PLANTATION,

                               AND OF THE

                             FAMILY SERVANTS

               WHOSE FIDELITY AND AFFECTION CONTRIBUTED SO
                MATERIALLY TO ITS COMFORT AND HAPPINESS.




                             PREFATORY NOTE


Mr. Joel Chandler Harris has, in an admirable way, commended to public
notice the dialect and folk-lore in vogue among the Negroes of Middle
Georgia. With fidelity and cleverness has he perpetuated the legends
and songs once current among these peoples, and now fast lapsing into
oblivion. There is, however, a field, largely untrodden, in which may
be found ample opportunity for the exhibition of kindred inquiry and
humor. We refer to the swamp region of Georgia and the Carolinas,
where the lingo of the rice-field and the sea-island negroes is _sui
generis_, and where myths and fanciful stories, often repeated before
the war, and now seldom heard save during the gayer moods of the old
plantation darkies, materially differ from those narrated by the sable
dwellers in the interior.

In confirmation of this suggestion we record the following Negro Myths
from the Georgia Coast.

Augusta, Georgia, March, 1888.




                                CONTENTS


                                                            PAGE

          I. HOW COME BUH ALLIGATUR NEBBER SLEEP FUR FROM
               DE RIBBER BANK                                  1

         II. BUH TUKREY BUZZUD AN DE RAIN                      4

        III. HOW BUH COOTER FOOL BUH DEER                      5

         IV. BUH WOLF, BUH RABBIT, AN DE TAR BABY              7

          V. BUH FOWL-HAWK AN BUH ROOSTER                     12

         VI. BUH TUKREY BUZZUD AN DE KING CRAB                15

        VII. DE KING, EH DARTER, BUH WOLF, AN BUH RABBIT      18

       VIII. BUH PATTRIDGE AN BUH RABBIT                      20

         IX. DE OLE MAN AN DE GALLINIPPER                     22

          X. BUH SPARRUH                                      23

         XI. BUH ALLIGATUR AN BUH MASH-HEN                    25

        XII. BUH FOWL-HAWK AN BUH TURKREY BUZZUD              27

       XIII. BUH WOLF AN BUH RABBIT                           29

        XIV. BUH WOLF AN DE TWO DINNER                        34

         XV. BUH OWL AN BUH ROOSTER                           36

        XVI. BUH LION AN BUH GOAT                             38

       XVII. BUH BEAR AN BUH TIGER                            39

      XVIII. BUH MONKEY AN DE BULL-DOG                        42

        XIX. BUH ELEPHANT AN BUH ROOSTER                      45

         XX. DE PO MAN AN DE SNAKE                            46

        XXI. LEELY GAL, BUH ALLIGATUR, AN DE JAY-BUD          51

       XXII. DE CAT, DE RAT, DE CHEESE, AN DE FOX             53

      XXIII. BUH RABBIT AN DE TARRUH BEASTISES                55

       XXIV. BUH WOLF, BUH RABBIT, AN DE BUTTER               59

        XXV. DE EAGLE AN DE CHILLUN                           63

       XXVI. CHANTICLEER AN DE BAN-YAD ROOSTER                65

      XXVII. BUH RABBIT AN DE GROUN-MOLE                      68

     XXVIII. BUH RABBIT AN DE ROCK-SOUP                       71

       XXIX. DE TWO FREN AND DE BEAR                          73

        XXX. DE OLE MAN AN DET                                75

       XXXI. DE KING AN EH RING                               77

      XXXII. BUH LION, BUH RABBIT, BUH FOX, AN BUH ROCCOON    82

     XXXIII. BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE PORPUS               88

      XXXIV. DE DEBBLE AN MAY BELLE                           92

       XXXV. DE OLE MAN AN DE COON                            99

      XXXVI. BUH RABBIT AND DE CRAWFISH                      101

     XXXVII. BUH RABBIT AND BUH ELEPHUNT                     102

     XXXVIII. BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN BUH POSSUM            105

       XXXIX. BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE HOLLER TREE        108

          XL. BUH RABBIT AN DE CUNJUR MAN                    111

         XLI. BUH RABBIT, BUH FOX, AN DE FISHERMAN           114

        XLII. BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE YEARLIN            118

       XLIII. BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, DE DOG, AN DE GOOSE      120

        XLIV. BUH SQUIRLE AN’ BUH FOX                        122

         XLV. BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE BUCKRA MAN         124

        XLVI. BUH RABBIT AN BUH WOLF FUNERAL                 127

       XLVII. DE NEW NIGGER AN EH MOSSA                      130

      XLVIII. BUH RABBIT AN DE KING DARTER                   132

        XLIX. DE SINGLE BALL                                 134

           L. BUH ROCCOON AN BUH POSSUM                      136

          LI. BUH WOLF, BUH RABBIT AN DE RAIN                137

         LII. BUH ALLIGATUR, BUH RABBIT AN BUH WOLF          140

        LIII. DE DYIN BULL-FROG                              144

         LIV. BUH RABBIT, BUH PATTRIDGE, AN DE COW           145

          LV. DE FIDDLER, BUH TIGER, AN BUH BEAR             147

         LVI. DE OLE KING AN DE NOUNG KING                   149

        LVII. BUH GOAT AN BUH WOLF                           151

       LVIII. DENTISTRY AT THE OLD PLANTATION HOME           155

         LIX. THE NEGRO AND THE ALLIGATOR                    161

          LX. SPERITS                                        169

         LXI. DADDY JUPITER’S VISION                         177




                               NEGRO MYTHS




                                   I.

                   HOW COME BUH ALLIGATUR NEBBER SLEEP
                        FUR FROM DE RIBBER BANK.


One time Buh Rabbit, him meet Buh Alligatur, an eh ax um: “Budder, you
tek life berry onconsarne. Enty you come pon trouble some time?” Buh
Alligatur, him mek answer: “No, Budder, nuttne nebber bodder me. Me
dunno wuh you call trouble. Me hab plenty er bittle fuh eat. Me sleep
an tek me pledjuh. Wuh mek you tink trouble kin come topper me?” Buh
Rabbit, him berry cunnin. Eh yent say nuttne. Eh know Buh Alligatur
blan come out de ribber an sun isself in de broom-grass fiel. Buh
Rabbit, eh laugh oneside to isself an mek plan to pit trouble on Buh
Alligatur.

De nex day, wen de sun hot, Buh Alligatur come out de ribber. Eh so
full er fish an crab eh casely kin crawl. Eh drag isself trugh de mash,
an eh gone in de broom-grass fiel, and tretch isself in de grass, an
fall fas tersleep. Buh Rabbit bin der watch um all de time. Buh Rabbit
too scheemy. Now eh pick eh chance. Wen eh tink Buh Alligatur done gone
tersleep, eh tiptoe ebber so sofe tell eh come right pon top er Buh
Alligatur. Eh notice um close. Eh yeye shet. Eh duh sleep fuh true.
Den Buh Rabbit slip back. Eh say to isself: “I guine mek Buh Alligatur
know wuh call trouble dis day.” Eh trike fire. Eh light one fat pine
tick, an eh set fire to de broom-grass all roun an roun de fiel. Buh
Alligatur, eh day in de middle fas tersleep. Eh dunno wuh Buh Rabbit
up teh. Bimeby de fire, eh biggin fuh roll. Buh Alligatur wake up. Eh
see de smoke. Eh yeddy de fire duh commin. Eh dunno wuh fur do. De fire
biggin fur bun um. Eh run dis way, de fire meet um. Eh lick back an try
tarruh side. De fire meet um day too.

Buh Rabbit, him duh tan off duh watch an duh half kill isself wid
laugh. Buh Alligatur holler. Eh holler. Eh holler. Nobody yeddy. Nobody
come. Fire ebry side. No way fur um fur go. Eh cant git out. Man! sir!
eh mek up eh mine to bus trugh some how. Eh shet eh yeye. Eh cock up eh
tail, an yuh eh come straight fur de ribber.

Buh Rabbit, eh fall fur laugh. Eh hoop arter Buh Alligatur, an eh say:
“Hey, Budder! wats de time er day? Enty you bin tell me you nebber
meet up wid trouble? You run topper um to-day anyhow.”

Buh Alligatur yent hab time fuh mek answer. Eh yent crack eh teet to
Buh Rabbit. Eh jis is bex wid um is eh kin be. Eh yeye red. Eh tail
swinge. Eh gone fuh de ribber, an eh fall in head ober heel. De water
cool um. Eh ketch eh bref. Den eh raise isself on de top er de water an
eh holler back to Buh Rabbit: “Nummine, Boy, golong dis time. Me know
who mek all dis trouble fur me. Ef me ebber ketch you close dis ribber,
me guine larne you how ter come fool long me.”

Buh Rabbit faid Alligatur an ribber tell dis day. From dat day to dis
you kin nebber ketch Buh Alligatur sleep fur from de bank; an de fus
time eh yeddy bush crack, er anyting mek rackit, eh leggo eberyting an
fall right in de water.




                                   II.

                      BUH TUKREY BUZZUD AN DE RAIN.


Buh Tukrey Buzzud, him yent hab no sense no how. You watch um.

Wen de rain duh po down, eh set on de fench an eh squinch up isself. Eh
draw in eh neck, an eh try fur hide eh head, an eh look dat pittyful
you rale sorry for um. Eh duh half cry, an eh say to isself: “Nummine,
wen dis rain ober me guine buil house right off. Me yent guine leh dis
rain lick me dis way no mo.”

Wen de rain done gone, an de win blow, an de sun shine, wuh Buh Tukrey
Buzzud do? Eh set on de top er de dead pine tree way de sun kin wam um,
an eh tretch out eh wing, an eh tun roun an roun so de win kin dry eh
fedder, an eh laugh to isself, an eh say: “Dis rain done ober. Eh yent
guine rain no mo. No use fur me fuh buil house now.” Caless man dis
like Buh Tukrey Buzzud.




                                  III.

                   HOW BUH COOTER[1] FOOL BUH DEER.[2]


Buh Deer, him kin outrun all de tarruh creetur. Buh Cooter, him cant
go fast no time. Him kin jis creep, an dat all; but him hab plenty er
sense.

One day Buh Deer bin a laugh at Buh Cooter becase eh walk so slow. Den
Buh Cooter, him git mad, an eh tell Buh Deer dat ef eh does slow eh hab
de bes win, an eh bet Buh Deer eh could beat um to de fibe mile pose.
Buh Deer, him smile an tuk de bet. Dey gree on nex Monday week fur run
de race.

Buh Cooter, him call togedder him fren an tole um bout de bet an wen de
race fur run. Eh gaged fibe er um fur help um. Deese yer Cooter am all
so much like one anurrer you cant tell one from turrer. So day all come
inter cohoot an conclude to fool Buh Deer.

One gone to de fus mile pose on de big road. Anurrer gone to de nex
mile pose, an anurrer to de nex: so dat on de day wen de race fur run,
Buh Cooter hab a fren at ebery mile pose. Buh Deer nebber bin know
nuttne bout dis plan.

Wen de time come fur run de race, Buh Deer an Buh Cooter bofe stat off
togedder. Befo you kin tun roun Buh Deer done gone out uh sight, an lef
Buh Cooter in de middle er de road duh laugh to isself. Wen Buh Deer
git to de fus mile pose, day was Buh Cooter day head er um. Buh Deer
couldnt tell how dat happn. Eh men eh pace. At de nex mile pose day was
Buh Cooter a crawlin along. Buh Deer git mad. Eh lay isself out ter eh
berry lenk, but befo eh ketch de nex mile pose eh meet Buh Cooter in de
road dis a passin er dat pose. Buh Deer jump clean ober um an mek fur
de nex mile pose. Eh yent bin want fur bleeve eh own yeye wen eh see
Buh Cooter dere done git head er um agin. Eh so mad eh try fuh kick Buh
Cooter outer de road, an eh straighten fur de las mile pose. Wen eh git
day, eh meet Buh Cooter puffin an er blowin an a leanin up gin de pose
duh laugh at um.

An dat de way Buh Cooter fool Buh Deer an win de bet.


FOOTNOTES:

     [1] Land Terrapin.

     [2] This and two preceding _Myths_ first published in
         Augusta, Ga., _Chronicle and Constitutionalist_ of
         March 11, 1883.




                                   IV.

                  BUH WOLF, BUH RABBIT, AN DE TAR BABY.


Buh Wolf and Buh Rabbit, dem bin lib nabur. De dry drout come. Ebry
ting stew up. Water scace. Buh Wolf dig one spring fuh him fuh git
water. Buh Rabbit, him too lazy an too scheemy fuh wuk fuh isself. Eh
pen pon lib off tarruh people. Ebry day, wen Buh Wolf yent duh watch
um, eh slip to Buh Wolf spring, an eh full him calabash long water an
cah um to eh house fuh cook long and fuh drink. Buh Wolf see Buh Rabbit
track, but eh couldnt ketch um duh tief de water.

One day eh meet Buh Rabbit in de big road, an eh ax um how eh mek out
fur water. Buh Rabbit say him no casion fuh hunt water: him lib off
de jew on de grass. Buh Wolf quire: “Enty you blan tek water outer me
spring?” Buh Rabbit say: “Me yent.” Buh Wolf say: “You yis, enty me see
you track?” Buh Rabbit mek answer: “Yent me gone to you spring. Must
be some edder rabbit. Me nebber bin nigh you spring. Me dunno way you
spring day.” Buh Wolf no question um no mo; but eh know say eh bin Buh
Rabbit fuh true, an eh fix plan fuh ketch um.

De same ebenin eh mek Tar Baby, an eh gone an set um right in de middle
er de trail wuh lead to de spring, an dist in front er de spring.

Soon a mornin Buh Rabbit rise an tun in fuh cook eh bittle. Eh pot
biggin fuh bun. Buh Rabbit say: “Hey! me pot duh bun. Lemme slip to Buh
Wolf spring an git some water fuh cool um.” So eh tek eh calabash an
hop off fuh de spring. Wen eh ketch de spring, eh see de Tar Baby duh
tan dist een front er de spring. Eh stonish. Eh stop. Eh come close.
Eh look at um. Eh wait fur um fuh mobe. De Tar Baby yent notice um. Eh
yent wink eh yeye. Eh yent say nuttne. Eh yent mobe. Buh Rabbit, him
say: “Hey titter, enty you guine tan one side an lemme git some water?”
De Tar Baby no answer. Den Buh Rabbit say: “Leely Gal, mobe, me tell
you, so me kin dip some water outer de spring long me calabash.” De Tar
Baby wunt mobe. Buh Rabbit say: “Enty you know me pot duh bun? Enty you
know me hurry? Enty you yeddy me tell you fuh mobe? You see dis han? Ef
you dont go long and lemme git some water, me guine slap you ober.” De
Tar Baby stan day. Buh Rabbit haul off an slap um side de head. Eh han
fastne. Buh Rabbit try fuh pull eh hand back, an eh say: “Wuh you hole
me han fuh? Lemme go. Ef you dont loose me, me guine box de life outer
you wid dis tarruh han.” De Tar Baby yent crack eh teet. Buh Rabbit hit
um, bim, wid eh tarruh han. Dat han fastne too same luk tudder. Buh
Rabbit say: “Wuh you up teh? Tun me loose. Ef you dont leggo me right
off, me guine knee you.” De Tar Baby hole um fas. Buh Rabbit skade an
bex too. Eh faid Buh Wolf come ketch um. Wen eh fine eh cant loosne
eh han, eh kick de Tar Baby wid eh knee. Eh knee fastne. Yuh de big
trouble now. Buh Rabbit skade den wus den nebber. Eh try fuh skade de
Tar Baby. Eh say: “Leely Gal, you better mine who you duh fool long.
Me tell you, fuh de las time, tun me loose. Ef you dont loosne me han
an me knee right off, me guine bus you wide open wid dis head.” De
Tar Baby hole um fas. Eh yent say one wud. Den Buh Rabbit butt de Tar
Baby een eh face. Eh head fastne same fashion luk eh han an eh knee.
Yuh de ting now. Po Buh Rabbit done fuh. Eh fastne all side. Eh cant
pull loose. Eh gib up. Eh bague. Eh cry. Eh holler. Buh Wolf yeddy
um. Eh run day. Eh hail Buh Rabbit: “Hey, Budder! wuh de trouble? Enty
you tell me you no blan wisit me spring fuh git water? Who calabash
dis? Wuh you duh do yuh anyhow?” Buh Rabbit so condemn eh yent hab one
wud fuh talk. Buh Wolf, him say: “Nummine, I done ketch you dis day.
I guine lick you now.” Buh Rabbit bague. Eh bague. Eh prommus nebber
fuh trouble Buh Wolf spring no mo. Buh Wolf laugh at um. Den eh tek an
loose Buh Rabbit from de Tar Baby, an eh tie um teh one spakleberry
bush, an eh git switch an eh lick um tel eh tired. All de time Buh
Rabbit bin a bague an a holler. Buh Wolf yent duh listne ter um, but eh
keep on duh pit de lick ter um. At las Buh Rabbit tell Buh Wolf: “Dont
lick me no mo. Kill me one time. Mek fire an bun me up. Knock me brains
out gin de tree.” Buh Wolf mek answer: “Ef I bun you up, ef I knock you
brains out, you guine dead too quick. Me guine trow you in de brier
patch, so de brier kin cratch you life out.” Buh Rabbit say: “Do Buh
Wolf, bun me: broke me neck, but dont trow me in de brier patch. Lemme
dead one time. Dont tarrify me no mo.” Buh Wolf yent bin know wuh Buh
Rabbit up teh. Eh tink eh bin guine tare Buh Rabbit hide off. So, wuh
eh do? Eh loose Buh Rabbit from de spakleberry bush, an eh tek um by
de hine leg, and eh swing um roun, an eh trow um way in de tick brier
patch fuh tare eh hide an cratch eh yeye out. De minnit Buh Rabbit drap
in de brier patch, eh cock up eh tail, eh jump, an eh holler back to
Buh Wolf: “Good bye, Budder! Dis de place me mammy fotch me up,--dis de
place me mammy fotch me up:” an eh gone befo Buh Wolf kin ketch um. Buh
Rabbit too scheemy.




                                   V.

                      BUH FOWL-HAWK AN BUH ROOSTER.


Buh Fowl-Hawk, him fly ebry day dis way and dat way ober de lan, an eh
cant fine nuttne fuh eat. Eh hail de Sun one time, an eh tell um eh so
hongry eh ready fuh drap; dat eh cant git bittle fuh eat; an he dunno
wuh fuh do. De Sun, eh say: “Budder, ef you kin ketch me in me bed, me
gree fuh fine you in bittle.” Buh Hawk tek de greement, an eh try berry
hade fuh come pon topper de Sun in eh bed. But ebry time de Sun done
git up befo Buh Hawk ketch de place way de Sun sleep. Buh Hawk gib up.
Eh dead tired. Den eh tun in an consult Buh Rooster. Buh Rooster yeddy
him tale, and den eh say: “Me tell you, Buh Hawk, wuh you better do.
You come sleep right ober me back; an wen, soon a mornin, you yeddy me
knock me wing togedder and crow, you sail right off fuh de Sun house,
an you kin ketch um befo eh git up from eh bed.” Buh Hawk do dis es Buh
Rooster tell um. Eh come dat ebenin, an eh set on de tree-limb right
ober way Buh Rooster duh sleep.

Long befo day duh broke Buh Rooster knock eh wing togarruh an crow.
Bless yo soul! Buh Fowl-Hawk wake up, eh switch eh tail, eh pitch off
de tree, an eh mek fur de spot way de Sun blan sleep. Eh ketch um een
eh big house. Eh day in eh bed. Buh Hawk, eh knock to de do. De Sun
say: “Who dat?” Buh Hawk mek answer: “Duh me.” De Sun say: “Who you?”
Buh Hawk say; “Duh me, Budder Hawk.” De Sun quire: “Wuh you want long
me?” Buh Hawk mek answer: “Enty you bin tell me one day dat ef me kin
ketch you in you bed you guine fine me? Now me done ketch you in de
bed. Gimme de bittle you prommus me. Me berry hongry.” De Sun bex. Eh
wunt come to de do, but eh holler back to Buh Hawk, an eh say: “You tun
right roun, an you go to de man wuh pint you to ketch me in me bed, an
you tell um fuh fine you.” Buh Hawk rale disappint. Eh try fuh swade de
Sun, but de Sun wunt listne ter um; and de Sun dribe um way from him
house. Buh Hawk mad, an wen eh see eh cant git no bittle from de Sun,
eh fly back to Buh Rooster. Buh Rooster, him ax um: “Me Budder, how you
mek out?” Buh Hawk tell um eh yent mek out wut. Den eh up an quaint
Buh Rooster how de Sun wouldnt gie um no bittle fuh eat; how eh dribe
um way; an how eh tell um fuh go back to de man wuh pit um on de trail
fuh ketch um in eh bed, an mek um fine um. Buh Rooster mek answer:
“Budder, me yent hab no bittle fuh gie you. Me no kin fine you.” Buh
Hawk say: “Me dead tired. Me berry hongry. Me mus hab me payment.” Buh
Rooster say: “You cant git no payment outer me. All me got duh me wife
an me chillun, an me know me yent guine gie you none er dem.” Wen Buh
Hawk see eh cant swade Buh Rooster fuh fine um, eh try narruh plan. Eh
leff Buh Rooster, an eh sail way up in de element tell eh done gone
in de cloud. All de time eh duh watch Buh Rooster. Wen Buh Rooster
clean forgit Buh Hawk, an leh eh chillun play bout een de grass, befo
eh know, down drap Buh Fowl-Hawk, an eh ketch up one er dem same Buh
Rooster chillun. Eh fly off wid um to one big oak tree, an eh pick eh
bone clean. Buh Rooster holler, but eh cant tetch Buh Hawk. De chicken
sweet. Buh Hawk feel good. From dat day tell now, Buh Fowl-Hawk blan
pick eh chance an lib off Buh Rooster chillun.




                                   VI.

                   BUH TUKREY BUZZUD AN DE KING CRAB.


You notus Buh Tukrey Buzzud. Him lub lamb, an dead cow, an dead horse,
an snake, an alligatur, an all kinder varmint. Eh berry lub dead fish
too, but eh nebber bodder wid crab. You sabe huccom so? Lemme tell you.

One time one fisher-man bin come from fishin. Eh tek out de good
fish, eh tring um on a mash grass, an eh lef in de boat some leely
gannet-mullet an catfish wuh eh no want, an one big King Crab wuh eh
bin ketch duh ribber. De sun hot. De fish done dead. Bimeby eh smell
bad in de boat. Buh Tukrey Buzzud, wuh bin a grine salt way up in de
element, scent um, an down eh come. Eh gone in de boat an eh eat up
de fish wuh day day. Eh dat greedy eh duh hunt fuh mo. Eh see de King
Crab duh squat een de water duh bottom er de boat. Eh tretch open eh
wing fuh skade de Crab an mek um come outer de water. Buh Tukrey Buzzud
faid water. Eh nebber will wet him foot ef eh kin help. De King Crab
see de Buzzud, an eh crawl up long side de boat. Buh Tukrey Buzzud ben
ober fuh pick um. De Crab graff Buh Tukrey Buzzud leg wid eh claw.
Buh Tukrey Buzzud hop an kick. Eh couldnt mek de Crab leggo. De ting
hot um berry bad. Buh Tukrey Buzzud rise wid de Crab duh heng on ter
eh leg. Eh sail up in de element. De Crab stick ter um. Buh Tukrey
Buzzud try ebry plan fuh shake um off. De Crab wunt loose eh grip. Buh
Tukrey Buzzud tun summerset in de sky. Eh flap eh wing. Eh mek all
sorter curous motion. Eh cant shake de Crab loose. Bimeby eh try fuh
bite de Crab. All ob a sutten, de Crab tek eh tarruh claw, an eh fastne
Buh Tukrey Buzzud roun eh neck. Yuh de big trouble now. One claw hole
Buh Tukrey Buzzud foot; tarruh claw clamp Buh Tukrey Buzzud roun eh
neck. De Bud duh choke. Eh gib up. Eh cant go no fudder. Eh dis leggo
ebryting in de element, an eh fall heel ober head plash in de water.
De minnit de King Crab fine isself in de ribber, eh loosne eh hole an
eh gone der bottom. Buh Tukrey Buzzud mose drown. Eh fedder wet. Eh
splutter, eh wabble, an arter awhile eh manage fuh ketch eh bref, an eh
mount eh wing, an eh sail off teh one dead libe-oak tree, wuh grow on
de bank, an eh set down day an eh pick eh fedder, an eh watch de blood
duh drap from eh neck an leg, an eh say to isself: “Me nebber guine
bodder long crab gen long as me lib.” An eh nebber did. You show King
Crab to Buh Tukrey Buzzud, an eh’ll leff um. Eh yent guine nigh um. All
eh fambly faid um.




                                  VII.

              DE KING, EH DARTER, BUH WOLF, AN BUH RABBIT.


One time er King hab er pooty Darter. Buh Wolf an Buh Rabbit all two
bin a spark at um an a cote um. De sanfly bin berry bad. De King tell
Buh Wolf an Buh Rabbit de one wuh kin stan de sanfly de longes bedout
bresh um way, shill git de gal.

Buh Wolf yent bin so scheemy as Buh Rabbit. Wen dem all was a settin
fuh de match, Buh Rabbit, him say: “Gentlemans, my fader had a black
horse. Eh had a white spot yuh, and a red spot day; a white spot yuh,
and a red spot day; a white spot yuh, and a red spot day.” Ebry time eh
pint out de place way de spot bin, eh dribe off de sanfly.

Wile dis duh guine on, de sanfly mose eat up Buh Wolf. Eh bleege fur
cratch an slap. So Buh Rabbit gain de day, an de King gie um eh Darter.

Buh Wolf, him berry sad, an eh wunt talk. All de lady bin a set in de
piazza long de King an eh Darter. Den Buh Rabbit say: “Come, Buh Wolf,
leh we broke up. Ef you lemme ride you ter de big gate me guine tun de
King Darter ober ter you.” Buh Wolf happy. Eh gree fuh leh Buh Rabbit
ride um. Buh Rabbit light on eh back. Eh hab spur on. Buh Wolf dunno
nuttne bout dis. Soon es Buh Rabbit git on Buh Wolf back, eh clamp eh
leg onder Buh Wolf belly, an eh clap spur ter Buh Wolf. Buh Wolf rare
up. Eh jump. Eh kick. Eh leddown. Eh try ebry way fuh trow Buh Rabbit.
Buh Rabbit stick ter eh back, an wunt fall off. De mo Buh Wolf rare up
an kick an pitch, de wus Buh Rabbit spur um. Wen eh fine eh cant trow
Buh Rabbit, eh tek de big road an lean fuh de gate. Buh Rabbit stick de
spur in um ebry jump. Buh Wolf run. Eh run. Eh holler. Eh holler. Buh
Rabbit duh set on eh back an duh spur um, an duh look dess as happy an
content as eh kin be. Wen dey guine tru de big gate, Buh Rabbit light
off eh back an jump on top de gate pose. Buh Wolf cant stop run. Eh
gone. Buh Rabbit shet de gate, an tun back, an jine de compny, an tek
eh bride.




                                  VIII.

                      BUH PATTRIDGE AN BUH RABBIT.


Buh Pattridge and Buh Rabbit jine compny fuh kill cow. Wen dey done
kill um, dey share de meat equel. Buh Pattridge tek one half; Buh
Rabbit, him tek tarruh half. Buh Pattridge tote him share home, an cook
some, an gen um to him chillun. Buh Rabbit, him tay buhhine an watch
him share. Wen Buh Pattridge an him chillun done eat dem belly full,
Buh Pattridge gone back to de place way de cow bin kill. Eh meet Buh
Rabbit duh siddown day duh wait fuh hire somebody fuh cahr him meat ter
him house. Buh Pattridge, him want mo meat. Eh up an tell Buh Rabbit:
“Dat cow meat no good. Me cook some an gen to me chillun, an eh kill
two er um.” Buh Rabbit say: “Eh yent.” Buh Pattridge say: “Me tell you
eh yiz. Me bin eat some too, an eh mek me feel berry bad. Rattlesnake
must a bin trike dat cow an pizen um.” Den Buh Pattridge fall on de
groun, an flutter, flutter, flutter, dis like eh bin guine fuh dead.
Buh Rabbit tink say de pizen meat been a wuk in um, an eh hop off, an
eh fetch water, an eh trow um in Buh Pattridge face. Wen Buh Pattridge
sorter vive, Buh Rabbit tell um eh no want de meat, dat eh guine leff
um. Den Buh Rabbit wish Buh Pattridge de time er day, an gone teh him
house. Soon as Buh Rabbit git outer yearin, Buh Pattridge whistle fuh
him chillun. De gang all bin in de bush duh watch. Den dey all run up
an cahr de meat to dem house, an cook um an eat um.

De meat bin good, an Buh Pattridge only do dat fuh fool Buh Rabbit an
git him share too.




                                   IX.

                      DE OLE MAN AN DE GALLINIPPER.


An ole man bin a hunt roccoon in de wood. Eh hab eh dog fuh tree de
coon, an eh hatchich fuh chop down de tree. De dog bark. De ole man
gone ter um. Eh look up de tree fuh see de coon. Steader de coon, er
big Gallinipper bin a settin in de crotch er de sweet-gum. De tree so
big de ole man cant retch round um wid bofe eh arm. De dog bark at de
Gallinipper. Eh bark. Eh bark. De Gallinipper git bex. Eh light off de
tree fuh bite de dog. De dog holler an run roun de tree. De Gallinipper
miss eh lick, an dribe eh bill trugh de tree tell de pint come out on
tarruh side. De ole man try fuh chop off de een er de Gallinipper bill.
Wen de Gallinipper see wuh de ole man up teh, eh rare back an try fur
pull eh bill outer de tree. Eh fastne so tight eh couldnt git um out,
but eh strain so hebby eh drag de tree up by de root. De ole man dat
scade eh drop eh hatchich, eh leff eh dog der wood, and eh lean fur
home.




                                   X.

                              BUH SPARRUH.


Buh Sparruh, him berry leetle, but him lub fur brag. Eh yent much fur
wuk.

One time de Bluefinch, de Trasher, de Red-Bud, de Jay-Bud, de
Pattridge, and de Sparruh all come inter cohoot ter plant tetter[3] and
see who kin raise de bigges. Wen de tetter done mek an dig, all de bud
collec togarruh, an ebry one fotch a tetter ter show wuh kind a crop eh
mek. De Crow bin de judge. Eh look ober all de tetter, an wen eh fine
Buh Sparruh no bin bring none, eh ax Buh Sparruh: “Way you tetter?” Buh
Sparruh biggin fur brag, an eh say: “Me tetter, him heap bigger den
any me see. Me farruh befo me blan plant tetter, an him tetter bigger
ner de calf er me leg. Me kin beat me farruh raise tetter. Me yent
bin bring no tetter wid me case me no want fur mek me fren feel bad.”
Tarruh bud say: “Nummine, you go fetch you tetter. Leh we see um.” Wen
Buh Sparruh fine dem all bent pon mek um show eh tetter, eh say: “Well,
wait pon top me. Me guine git me tetter.” Buh Sparruh gone, an de bud
all wait. Dem wait tell dem tired, an Buh Sparruh no come back. Den
Buh Crow, wuh bin de judge, sen Buh Bluefinch fur fine Buh Sparruh,
an see wuh eh duh do. Buh Bluefinch meet Buh Sparruh duh pick seed in
one ole fiel. Eh hail um: “Hey! Buh Sparruh! wuh mek you no come back?
All de tarruh bud duh wait top you fur show you tetter.” Buh Sparruh
rare isself back, an eh mek answer: “You go tell Buh Crow an de tarruh
gentlemans me tetter so big me cant tote um.”

Buh Sparruh lie. Eh dis bin a brag. Eh yent nebber bin plant no tetter.


FOOTNOTES:

     [3] Sweet potatoes.




                                   XI.

                     BUH ALLIGATUR AN BUH MASH-HEN.


Buh Alligatur nebber does trubble Buh Mash-hen an eh chillun. Enty,
heap a time, you see Buh Mash-hen duh ketch fiddler on de ribber bank
close by way Buh Alligatur duh feed, an Buh Alligatur yent lick at um
wid eh tail, ner skade um? You know huccum dis? Ef you dunno, lemme
tell you.

One time Buh Alligatur, him been er eat crab. Him bin hab one teet wuh
hab hole in um. Dat teet duh hot um berry bad. Buh Alligatur blan chaw
up crab, shell an all. Wen eh der eat dem crab, one er de claw fastne
in him rotten teet, and hot um so bad eh mek um holler. Eh cant do
nuttne cept open eh jaw an moan. Eh foot yent long nough fuh pick de
claw out.

Wile eh bin a moan an suffer, Buh Mash-hen pass by. Buh Alligatur hail
um an tell um wuh happne, and mek um sensible how bad de claw duh hot
um, an how eh yent hab de power fuh git um out, an eh bague um fuh
pull de ting out wid eh bill. Buh Mash-hen yeddy um, but eh fade fur
trus eh head between Buh Alligatur jaw. Eh spicion say Buh Alligatur
guine trick um, an kill um, an eat um, an eh tell Buh Alligatur him
too scheemy. But Buh Alligatur, him schway to Buh Mash-hen dat eh yent
guine trubble um, an dat ef eh would bleege um an pick de ting out, eh
would be fren ter um an eh fambly all dem life, an mek all dem tarruh
Alligatur fren too.

Wen Buh Mash-hen see Buh Alligatur duh bague so harde, an wen eh fine
out eh bin der tell de trute, eh tek pity on um, an eh pit eh head in
eh mouf an eh pull out de crab-claw, wuh fastne in eh teet, wid eh bill.

Dat ease Buh Alligatur, an eh tell Buh Mash-hen heap er tenky. An eh
mek all eh quaintunce sensible er de big faber wuh Buh Mash-hen bin
done ter um.

Buh Alligatur, him keep eh wud. Ebber sence, Buh Mash-hen kin walk bout
de mash an de ribber, an buil nes, an ketch fiddler an shrimp all round
Buh Alligatur, an eh yent try fuh bodder um.

Dat de way Buh Alligatur an Buh Mash-hen come fur lib togerruh luk same
fambly.




                                  XII.

                  BUH FOWL-HAWK AN BUH TUKREY BUZZUD.


Time bin berry harde. Bittle oncommon scace. Buh Fowl-hawk an Buh
Tukrey Buzzud, dem bin a sail backwud and forrud in de element, duh
look fuh see wuh dem kin pick up fur eat. Es dem pass one a nurruh,
Buh Fowl-hawk, him ax Buh Tukrey Buzzud how him mek out. Buh Tukrey
Buzzud mek answer dat eh yent mek out wut; dat half de time eh cant
fine nuttne fuh eat; dat eh so hongry eh mos ready fuh perish; but dat
eh mek up eh mine ter keep on guine, an ter wait on de Lord. Den eh
quire ob Buh Fowl-hawk how him duh git long dis yer tight time. Buh
Fowl-hawk, him switch eh tail, an eh say him smarte nough fuh git him
libbin; dat him dont lack fuh bittle; dat Lord er no Lord, him manage
fuh fine all him want fuh eat.

Wid dat dem part compny, an gone dem own couse.

Bimeby dem sail pass one anurrer gen, an Buh Fowl-hawk, him call to
Buh Tukrey Buzzud, an him say: “Enty me bin tell you me hab no trouble
fuh fine bittle wenebber me want um? You see dat black chicken down
yander? Me guine ketch um now fuh me dinner.”

Wid dat, eh leff Buh Tukrey Buzzud, an eh mek eh lunge fuh kibber de
chicken. Stidder eh bin one chicken, eh tun out fuh bin er sharp-pinted
stump; an befo Buh Fowl-hawk fine out de diffunce, an kin check eh
speed, eh hit eh bres gin de stump an kill ehself.

Two, tree day arter dat, Buh Tukrey Buzzud bin a sail ober de same
groun, an eh cotch de scent er someting dead. Eh fole eh wing an eh
come down. Wen eh come fuh fine out, eh see Buh Fowl-hawk duh led down
dead. Den eh say: “Enty me bin tell you eh heap better ter wait on de
Lord stidder trus ter you own luck? You wouldnt yeddy me, an you see
wuh happne. Now me tun come, an you flesh guine ile me bade.” Wid dat,
eh eat up Buh Fowl-hawk.

“De man wuh trus in ehself,” moralized Daddy Sandy, “guine fail; wile
dem dat wait topper de Lord will hab perwision mek fur um.”




                                  XIII.

                         BUH WOLF AN BUH RABBIT.


Buh Wolf and Buh Rabbit bin a cote de same Gal. De Gal bin rich an
berry pooty. Dem tuk tun fuh wisit um. Buh Rabbit, him gone der mornin,
and Buh Wolf, him gone der ebenin. De Gal harde fuh mek up eh mine. Eh
sorter courage bofe er um. One mornin Buh Rabbit bin a mek fun er Buh
Wolf ter de Gal, an eh tell um say Buh Wolf yent duh nuttne mo den eh
farruh ridin horse.

Wen Buh Wolf pay him wisit de same ebenin, de Gal tell um wuh Buh
Rabbit bin say bout um. De ting mek Buh Wolf bex, an eh say Buh Rabbit
lie, an eh guine fetch Buh Rabbit ter de Gal an mek um tek back dat big
wud befo eh face.

Buh Wolf leff de Gal an gone straight ter Buh Rabbit house. Buh Rabbit
bin spicion say de Gal guine tell Buh Wolf wuh him bin say bout um; an
eh know, wen Buh Wolf yeddy, dat eh boun fur tackle um bout um. So Buh
Rabbit, him fix eh plan.

Wen Buh Wolf git ter Buh Rabbit house, eh fine um all shet up. Eh look
same luk nobody bin day. Eh knock ter de do. Eh knock. Eh knock. No
ansur. Eh gone ter de winder. Eh shake um. Nobody mek ansur. Den eh
holler: “Buh Rabbit, Buh Rabbit!” Arter a while eh yeddy er leely woice
eenside say: “Who dat?” Buh Wolf ansur: “Duh me, Buh Wolf.” Buh Rabbit
say: “Wuh you want, Buh Wolf?” Buh Wolf, him say: “Lemme come in, Buh
Rabbit; me bleege fuh see you on tickler bidness.” Buh Rabbit, him mek
ansur: “Buh Wolf, me cant see you now; me berry sick; me day in me bed;
me too weak fuh open de do.” Buh Wolf say: “Buh Rabbit, you mus lemme
in: you de only man wuh kin ten ter de bidness wuh bring me yuh.” Buh
Rabbit try fuh pit um off. Eh tell um eh hab high feber, an eh cant
rise; dat eh back bin er hot um so bad eh cant tun in eh bed. But Buh
Wolf cist so strong, Buh Rabbit slip to de do, an eh draw de bolt, an
eh tiptoe back ter eh bed, an den eh say: “Well Budder, ef you mus see
me, bad off es me yiz, come in.” Wen Buh Wolf come in, eh fine Buh
Rabbit kibber up in eh bed, duh pant an duh moan berry pittiful. Buh
Wolf tan by de bed, an eh ax Buh Rabbit: “Enty you tell de Gal, wuh we
bin a cote, say me bin nuttne but you farruh ridin horse?” Buh Rabbit
say: “Me nebber did.” Buh Wolf say: “You yiz bin tell um so.” Buh
Rabbit say: “Me yent.” Den Buh Wolf schway: “De Gal done tell um say
Buh Rabbit sisso, an eh bleebe de Gal.” Buh Rabbit run Buh Wolf down
dat eh nebber bin nuse no sich wud. Den Buh Wolf say: “Ef you nebber
bin say no sich wud, you mus git up an go long me, an knowledge befo de
Gal dat you nebber bin sisso.” Buh Rabbit hole back. Eh say eh too weak
fuh git outer de bed, and dat ef eh did get up eh too weak fuh walk ter
de Gal house. But Buh Wolf foce um. Eh say: “You got ter go. Me guine
help you outer de bed, an ef you cant tek you foot, me guine tote you.”
Wen Buh Rabbit fine no chance fur um fuh dodge no mo, an dat Buh Wolf
boun fuh mek um go, eh git Buh Wolf fuh help um outer de bed. Arter
eh git on de flo, Buh Rabbit sorter faint way. Buh Wolf tek um up an
cahr um ter de do, an fan um. Buh Rabbit bin a play possum all de time.
Wen eh come too, Buh Wolf liff um up an pit um on eh back. Buh Rabbit
say: “Hole on, Buh Wolf, me cant set on you back dout fall off: me mus
hab someting fuh steady me; you mus gimme someting fuh me fuh hole on
ter. Yuh me farruh ole saddle an bridle. Lemme pit dem on you, an den
me tink me kin manage fuh go long wid you.” Buh Wolf, him yent spicion
nuttne, an eh tan still an leh Buh Rabbit pit de saddle an bridle on
um. Onbeknowinst ter Buh Wolf, Buh Rabbit slip behind de do an pit on
er pair er keen spur. Den Buh Wolf help um on eh back, an state fuh
trot fuh de Gal house. Buh Rabbit say: “Buh Wolf, dont go so fas: me so
weak me cant hole on; you mus walk.” Buh Wolf, him haky ter um, an eh
come down ter a walk. Wen dem retch de abnue wuh lead from de big road
ter de house way de Gal lib, dem shum all dress een white duh settin
in de piazza. Soon es dem pass tru de big gate, Buh Rabbit, him gedder
de range in eh han, an eh slap spur to Buh Wolf. Buh Wolf say: “You
fool, wuh you duh do?” an eh rare an pitch an try fuh trow Buh Rabbit
off. Buh Rabbit stick on, an eh clap de spur wus an wus ter Buh Wolf.
Wen Buh Wolf fine out eh cant do nuttne, eh keep de abnue straight fur
de house. Wen dem duh nigh de house Buh Rabbit holler ter de Gal: “Wuh
me bin tell you? Yuh me come pon me farruh ridin horse,” an eh rip
spur een Buh Wolf an eh hole um tight. De spur hot Buh Wolf so bad eh
couldnt do nuttne but run. Buh Rabbit tun um dest by de piazza, an eh
light off eh back, an eh run up ter de Gal, an eh say: “Wuh you tink er
me farruh ridin horse?” Buh Wolf so painful, so bex, an so shame, eh
keep on run, an eh nebber come back fur see de Gal no mo.

Buh Rabbit, him too scheemy fuh Buh Wolf. Wen de Gal notus how smate
Buh Rabbit bin, an how eh mek good eh big wud, eh gen um eh han, an,
leetle while arter, dem bin git marry.




                                  XIV.

                       BUH WOLF AN DE TWO DINNER.


Buh Wolf, him binner inwite ter two dinner de same day an de same time:
one gen by Cooter Bay, an de tarruh by John Bay. Dem bin bredder, an
dem lib on two seprite road wuh jine at de fork. Buh Wolf, him so
greedy him cept bofe inbitation. Wen de time come fuh go, eh dress
ehself up an eh light out. Wen eh git ter de place way de road fork, eh
stop an eh consider. Eh want fuh tek bofe road an go ter de two dinner.
Eh cant tek one an leff tarruh. Eh gone down one road; eh tun back; eh
tan ter de fork. Eh tek tarruh road; eh come back ter de fork; eh tan
day gen. Eh state off; eh tun back. Eh state off gen; eh tun back gen.
Eh cant mek up eh mine which dinner fuh tek an which dinner fuh leff.
Eh hanker arter bofe. Eh wase eh time. Wile dis bin a guine on, de
people bin a eat at bofe de dinner.

Bimeby yuh come some er dem, wuh bin eat dinner wid Cooter Bay, duh mek
dem way home. Dem see Buh Wolf duh tan in de fork er de road, an dem
hail um, an dem say: “Hi! Buh Wolf, wuh you duh do yuh?” Buh Wolf, him
mek answer: “Me guine ter Cooter Bay fuh dine long um.” Den dem tell um
say de dinner done ober; dat dem jist come from day, an dat dem bin hab
plenty er good bittle fuh eat. Buh Wolf rale cut down case eh loss one
dinner.

Eh hop off an mek fuh John Bay house fuh git de tarruh dinner. Eh yent
bin gone no destant befo eh meet dem people duh comin back wuh bin gone
fuh eat dinner long John Bay. Dem tell um de dinner done ober, an eh
mights well tun back. Buh Wolf outdone. Eh so greedy eh couldnt mek up
eh mine which dinner fuh tek. Eh tink eh guine git all two, an eh yent
git none. Eh gone home dat bex an hongry eh ready fuh kill ehself.

People wuh wunt mek up dem mine in time wuh dem mean fuh do guine git
leff.




                                   XV.

                         BUH OWL AN BUH ROOSTER.


Buh Owl, him bin a great music-meker. Him an Buh Rooster bin good fren.
Heap er bud blan wisit Buh Rooster house fuh yeddy music an fuh dance.
Buh Owl, him sing so well an eh pick de banjo so clear, nobody kin
listen ter um an keep eh foot still; but eh no wan leh nobody shum wen
eh duh sing an play. Buh Rooster, him always blan hab a dark room fuh
Buh Owl fuh set in wen eh duh play fuh de bud. Lamp day in day, but eh
hab shade on um. Buh Owl kin see de bud wuh duh dance, but de bud, dem
cant see Buh Owl. Buh Owl, him faid light, an eh yent der bole bud no
how.

One ebenin Buh Owl bin a sing an play oncommon well fuh de bud at Buh
Rooster house fuh dance. De pahler bin full, but dem yent bin know who
dat bin a mek de music. Buh Rooster, him bin prommus Buh Owl dat eh
yent guine tell who duh sing an play. Wen dem all bin dance tel dem
tired, dem all bague Buh Rooster fuh show dem de man wuh bin mek sich
pooty music fuh dem fuh dance long. Buh Rooster say him cant. Dem keep
on bague, tel, at lenk, Buh Rooster gone in tarruh room, an eh tek de
shade offer de lamp. Wen dem look pon topper Buh Owl, eh yeye so big,
an eh yez cock up so high, eh skade de people, an dem all holler an run.

Buh Owl, him berry bex case Buh Rooster broke eh wud, an he fall out
wid Buh Rooster. From dat day Buh Owl hate Buh Rooster, eh wife, an eh
chillun. Wenebber, duh night, eh yeddy any er um duh crow er der fix
ehself topper eh roose, eh mek fuh de place an eat um up. Eh yent do,
in dis wul, fuh man fuh ceive eh fren.




                                  XVI.

                          BUH LION AN BUH GOAT.

Buh Lion bin a hunt, an eh spy Buh Goat duh leddown topper er big rock
duh wuk eh mout an der chaw. Eh creep up fuh ketch um. Wen eh git close
ter um eh notus um good. Buh Goat keep on chaw. Buh Lion try fuh fine
out wuh Buh Goat duh eat. Eh yent see nuttne nigh um ceptin de nekked
rock wuh eh duh leddown on. Buh Lion stonish. Eh wait topper Buh Goat.
Buh Goat keep on chaw, an chaw, an chaw. Buh Lion cant mek de ting out,
an eh come close, an eh say: “Hay! Buh Goat, wuh you duh eat?” Buh Goat
skade wen Buh Lion rise up befo um, but eh keep er bole harte, an eh
mek ansur: “Me duh chaw dis rock, an ef you dont leff, wen me done long
um me guine eat you.” Dis big wud sabe Buh Goat. Bole man git outer
diffikelty way coward man lose eh life.




                                  XVII.

                         BUH BEAR AN BUH TIGER.

Buh Bear, him tired lib wid eh farruh an eh fambly, an eh tell eh
farruh eh guine way fuh mek eh own libbin, an eh want um fuh gem
wuhebber eh hab wuh cummin ter um from de fambly property. Eh farruh
an eh murrer try fuh swade um fuh stay long dem, but eh say eh mek up
eh mine fuh go. Den eh farruh tell um eh yent hab nuttne fuh gem cept
sebbn loaf er bread. Buh Bear, him berry disappint; but wen eh see eh
yent guine git nuttne mo, eh gree fuh tek um. Eh farruh tell um: “De
man wuh eat any er dat bread long you will hab fuh rastle long you fuh
sebbn year.” Buh Bear cahr eh bread, an gone der wood, an mek camp fuh
ehself. Wen eh bin er eat de bread, Buh Tiger come long an bague um
fuh some. Buh Bear say: “Buh Tiger, ef you eat any er dis yer bread,
you haffer rastle long me fuh sebbn year.” Buh Tiger, him answer: “Me
willin: me hongry; gimme de bread.” Den Buh Bear gen um some, an eh eat
um. Befo dem part Buh Tiger tell Buh Bear way him house yiz, and gree
fuh rastle long um de nex mornin. Buh Bear say: “Berry well: me guine
come ter you house by de time de sun git up, an you will haffer rastle
long me.”

Soon a mornin Buh Bear gone ter Buh Tiger house an knock ter de do. Buh
Tiger come out in er hurry, an dey graff hold er one anurrer. Buh Bear
fling Buh Tiger; an befo eh leh um git up, eh box um side er de head.

Nex day Buh Bear come gen same time, and Buh Tiger meet um, an dem
rastle, an Buh Bear fling um an hit um side er de head, same place way
eh bin knock um de day befo. Nex day same ting. Nex day same ting. Nex
day same ting. De six mornin, wen Buh Bear knock ter Buh Tiger do, Buh
Tiger yent come out. Eh sen eh wife fuh say eh bin berry sick. Buh Bear
say eh mus come out. Eh wife tell um; an arter Buh Tiger fine out Buh
Bear yent guine leff, eh come out. Eh head swell way Buh Bear bin a box
um. Buh Tiger look bad. Buh Bear hole um gen an eh trow um berry easy,
an den eh box um gen in de same ole place sider eh head, way eh bin a
knock um befo, an wuh swell. Eh hot Buh Tiger so bad eh holler. De nex
mornin, wen Buh Bear come, Buh Tiger bin in eh bed. Eh head tie up,
an eh wife bin a nuss um. Eh couldnt rastle long Buh Bear no mo. Buh
Bear, him shame um, an mek um leff eh house. Den Buh Bear mobe in an
mek ehself satify.

Buh Bear fine out dat de bread wuh eh farruh bin gen um, an wuh eh
hardly bin want fuh tote long um, done um a heap er good, an git um er
nice house fuh lib een.

“Wenebber,” added old Daddy Smart, “you farruh gie you anyting, tek um,
an tenky. You suttenly will fine out dat wuh eh gie you will do you no
harm, but eh will fetch good luck ter you.”




                                 XVIII.

                       BUH MONKEY AN DE BULL-DOG.

Ebry body cept Buh Monkey bin full er trouble. On ebry side you yeddy
nuttne cept bout trouble. Trouble yuh, trouble day, trouble ebry way.
Buh Monkey tell eh wife eh wonder wuh dis ting duh wuh ebry body bin a
talk bout, an wuh dem all duh call trouble. Him say him cant tell. Den
Buh Monkey mek up eh mine fuh go teh de Debble, an fine out from um. Eh
gone. Eh ketch de Debble duh eat eh brukwus; an eh ax um huccum ebry
body hab trouble cept him. An eh leh de Debble know say him wan fine
out wuh dis ting duh wuh bin a bodder ebry body, an wuh ebry body call
trouble. De Debble tell um fuh go een de kitchin an wait topper um, an
wen eh done eh brukwus him will come out an mek um sensible bout dis
ting wuh call trouble. Buh Monkey gone ter de kitchin, an tek one chair
an mek ehself saterfy. Eh jaw duh run water, fuh eh tink ter ehself de
Debble guine gem some nice brukwus. Eh wait day sich a lenk er time,
an no brukwus come. Den de Debble come outer de big house duh fetch er
bag een eh han. De bag done tie up. Eh gen de bag ter Buh Monkey, an
eh tell um: “Trouble day een dis yer bag. You cahr um tel you git een
de middle er de ole fiel, an den you open um, an you guine fine out wuh
call trouble.” Big fiel bin all roun an roun de house. Not a tree nur
a stump bin in dat fiel. Buh Monkey tek de bag. Eh hebby. Eh state fuh
home duh tote um. Eh tired befo eh retch de middle er de fiel. Wen eh
ketch de middle er de fiel, eh top, an eh onloose de bag. Bless God!
out jump one Bull-Dog, an eh tek right arter Buh Monkey. Eh run. Eh
run. Eh holler. Eh holler. De Dog day right arter um duh try fuh bite
um. Wen Buh Monkey git ter de wood, eh state fuh clime de fus tree eh
come teh. De Dog so close behine um eh snap at um an bite off eh tail.
Buh Monkey leff eh tail een de dog mouf, an gone up de tree. Eh fine
one crotch, an eh seddown duh pant an der cry. Eh skade so tell eh
scacely kin keep eh seat. Eh tail duh bleed. De Dog sed down onder de
tree, an watch um, an wait fur um fuh come down. Buh Monkey faid fuh
come down. Ebry time dat Buh Monkey mek motion fuh come down, de Dog
show eh teet an growl. Night come, and Buh Monkey, him day up de tree.
Eh fine out fuh true wuh call trouble. Eh dat tired, an sore, an skade,
eh dunno wuh fuh do. Bout middle der night de Dog hongry, an gone home
fuh eat eh bittle. Buh Monkey slip down de tree an mek track fuh him
house. Wen eh meet eh wife an chillun, an show um eh tail wuh bite off,
an tell um wuh eh bin tru, dem all mek er great miration, an dem all
conclude dem know nuff bout trouble, an yent want see um no mo. Bad
plan fuh people fuh hunt trouble wen trouble yent der hunt dem.




                                  XIX.

                      BUH ELEPHANT AN BUH ROOSTER.

Buh Elephant, him bin know Buh Rooster berry well. Dem blan roam
togerrur, an Buh Rooster blan wake Buh Elephant duh mornin, so eh kin
hunt eh bittle befo de jew dry.

Dem bin a talk togerrur one day, an Buh Elephant, him bet Buh Rooster
say him kin eat longer ner him. Buh Rooster, him tek de bet, an dem tun
in nex mornin, wen de sun jis bin a git up, fuh see who guine win de
bet. Buh Elephant, him gedder leaf an grass, an eat an eat tel eh full
an cant eat no mo. Buh Rooster, him sarche de grass fuh seed an wurrum,
an eh pick an eat. Wen Buh Elephant done full, an der tan onder de tree
duh flop eh yez, eh see Buh Rooster, dist es spry, duh walk bout an der
swaller seed an grasshopper an wurrum same luk eh dis biggin fuh eat.
Buh Elephant gib up. Eh fine eh yent de man wid de bigges belly wuh kin
eat de longes.




                                   XX.

                         DE PO MAN AN DE SNAKE.

One po Man bin er mek eh libbin long split shingle an cut timber in
de swamp. Him hab wife, but no chillun. Ebry day, from sunrise tel
sundown, eh day in de swamp der cut. Try eh bes, eh scacely kin mek
bread fuh eat.

One berry big Snake--de farruh er all dem tarruh snake wuh lib in
de swamp--notus de po man. Eh see how hard eh wuk an how little eh
mek, and eh tek pity on um. One ebenin, dis befo de po man knock off
wuk, dis snake crawl up ter de log way de man bin er chop, an eh say:
“Budder, how you der mek out?” De man mek answer: “Me yent mek out wut.
Me der wuk in dis swamp from sunrise tel dark, day een an day out, an
try me bes, me scacely kin mek bittle nough fuh me an me wife fuh eat.”
Den de snake, him say: “Me sorry fuh you, an me willin fuh help you.”
De man tenk um, an ax um how eh guine help um. De snake say: “You got
any chillun?” De man say: “No.” De snake quire: “You hab wife?” De man
say: “Yes.” De snake say: “Kin you keep secret from you wife?” De man
mek answer say eh kin. Buh Snake tell um eh faid fuh truss um; but wen
de man bague de snake berry hard fuh try um, de snake gree fuh do so.
Den de snake tell um eh guine gen um some money nex day, but eh mussne
tell eh wife way eh git de money. De man mek strong prommus, and so dem
part.

De nex day, jis befo de po man done task, de snake crawl up. Eh belly
an eh mouf puff out. Eh spit two quart er silber money on de groun dist
in front er de po man, an eh say: “You member wuh me bin tell you las
ebenin? Well, yuh some money me fotch fuh help you. Tek um, but member
ef you tell you wife way you git um, er who gen um ter you, eh yent
guine do you no good, an you guine dead a po man.” De man so glad fuh
git de money eh say: “Tenky, tenky, tenky, me budder; me neber guine
tell nobody way me git all dis money.” Arter eh leff de swamp fuh gone
home, de snake spicion say eh bin guine go back on eh prommus an tell
eh wife: so eh mek up eh mine fuh foller um an see wuh happne.

Eh bin dark wen eh retch de man house. Eh crawl up, an eh leddown dist
onder de winder, way him kin yeddy all de wud wuh talk in de house. De
man wife bin a tun roun an der cook supper. Arter him an eh husbun done
eat, eh husbun say: “Me bin hab big luck ter-day: looker dis money.”
Den eh pull out de silber and spread um on de table. Eh wife stonish.
Eh wife glad, an eh say: “Tell me way you bin git all dis money.” De
man say: “Fren gen um ter me.” Eh wife say: “Wuh fren?” De man say him
prommus no fuh tell. De wife say but eh mus tell um, an eh bague so
hard tel de man done furgit eh prommus, an eh up an mek um sensible how
de ting all happne. Den eh wife say: “Dat snake must hab eh belly full
er silber money, an me tell you wuh you do ter-morruh. Wen de snake
come fuh talk long you, you pick you chance an chop eh head off long
you ax, an tek all de money outer um.” Eh husbun gree fur do dist is
him say.

Buh Snake, him yeddy ebry wud dem talk, an eh gone to him house in de
swamp berry bex case de man wuh eh bin befren shouldder gone back on eh
prommus and mek bad bargain fuh kill um.

De nex day de man watch fuh de snake. Wen de sun duh lean fuh down, an
de man bin a try fuh split one big log, Buh Snake crawl up long sider
de log an show ehself ter de man. Dem talk togerrur; an de snake ax
de man: “You bin show you wife de money wuh me bin gen you?” De man
answer: “Yes, me yiz.” An den eh ax um: “You bin tell you wife way you
bin git um?” De man say: “No.” De snake ax um gen: “You sho you no bin
tell um you git um long me?” De man say: “Me tell you one time ready.
Wuh mek you ax me dat questun gen? You tink me duh lie?” Wid dat, eh
mek eh lick fuh chop de snake head off. De snake bin hab eh yeye on um,
an eh draw back gin de log. De ax miss de snake, an glance back off de
log an cut de man own leg off. De po man holler fuh somebody fuh come
fuh help um. Eh day way in de swamp out er yearin, an noboddy yeddy.
Wen eh duh bleed ter det, an dis befo eh dead, Buh Snake, him say ter
um: “Enty me bin tell you, wen me gen you dat silber money, ef you tell
you wife way you git um you guine dead one po man? You prommus me you
guine keep de secret. Steader dat, you gone home ter you wife, an you
show um de money, an you tell um way you git um. Mo na dat: you an him
fix plan fuh kill me wuh bin you fren, an rob me outer wuh money me
hab leff. Now you see de jedgment wuh come topper you. In try fuh chop
me head off, you cut you own foot off. You gwine dead in dis yer wood.
No man ner ooman gwine fine you. Buzzud gwine eat you.”

Eh happne dis is de snake say. De man broke eh wud, an eh dead a po man.

Anybody wuh gwine back on eh prommus, an try fuh harm de pusson wuh
done um a faber, sho ter meet up wid big trouble.




                                  XXI.

                LEELY GAL, BUH ALLIGATUR, AN DE JAY-BUD.

A leely Gal bin a gwine home. Eh come ter de ribber bank, an no boat
day fuh him fuh git cross. Eh dunno wuffer do. Eh seddown. Eh cry. Day
binner gwine. Alligatur yeddy um, an eh come day, an eh ax de leely
Gal wuh de matter. De leely Gal tell um. Den de Alligatur say: “Ef
you prommus no fuh tell who cahr you ober de ribber, me will pit you
cross.” De leely Gal prommus, an de Alligatur tek um on eh back and
ferry um ober all safe.

De nex day de Alligatur duh sun ehself on de ribber bank, an eh yeddy
er woice say: “Yaller-belly Alligatur ferry me ober. Yaller-belly
Alligatur ferry me ober.” Eh listne. Eh tink say de leely Gal bin a
talk, an dat eh bin broke eh prommus. Eh notus close, an wen eh yeddy
de woice gen eh see er Blue-Jay bin er talk um een de tree. Dat same
Blue-Jay bin day de ebenin befo, an bin er see an er yeddy all wuh
happne, but de leely Gal an de Alligatur nebber bin know.

De Jay-Bud keep a holler: “Yaller-belly Alligatur ferry me ober.” De
Alligatur call to de Jay-Bud, an eh quire: “Wudder dat you say?” An de
Jay-Bud keep a sing: “Yaller-belly Alligatur ferry me ober.” Alligatur,
him say: “Me hard er yearin. Come close, so me kin yeddy you song.”
De Bud fly down dist by Buh Alligatur, an eh sing gen: “Yaller-belly
Alligatur ferry me ober.” Buh Alligatur yeddy um berry well, but eh so
bex say de Bud done fine out, an der talk eh secret, dat eh want fuh
kill um sho. So eh say gen: “Me tell you me deef; come close; set on me
nose, so me kin yeddy wuh you duh sing.” De fool Bud come an light on
eh nose, an eh holler gen: “Yaller-belly Alligatur ferry me ober.” De
wud yent leff eh mouf befo Buh Alligatur trow open him mouf an ketch
um, an chaw de life outer um.

Bad plan fur stranger fuh meddle long tarruh people bidness.




                                  XXII.

                  DE CAT, DE RAT, DE CHEESE, AN DE FOX.

De Cat an de Rat, dem fine one big piece er cheese een er closet. Dem
cahr um way fuh share um. Dem cant gree how eh fuh dewide, an dem call
een de Fox fuh jedge between um.

De Fox, eh berry cunnin, an eh nebber furgit ehself. Eh bring eh
scale, an eh pit de cheese een um. Den eh tek eh knife an eh cut off
big piece, an eh pit um one side an eh say dis fuh de jedge. Den eh
weigh de cheese gen een de scale, an eh tek um out an eh cut off narrur
slice, an eh pit um one side an eh say dat fuh de jedge.

By dis time eh done tek mo ner half de cheese. Wen eh pit de cheese
back een de scale, an hole um up gen, Buh Cat an Buh Rat, dem bofe call
out: “Hole on, Jedge! Dis ting wrong. You gwine tek all we cheese an
leff we none.” Buh Fox, him berry bex, on eh gedder de cheese an eh
fole up eh scale, an eh holler out: “Begone, you rogue. You lib pon
tief, an you gwine tell me how fer do jestice? Good fuh you me only tek
de cheese, an leh you go wid you life. Me great mine fuh kill you bofe.”

Wid dat, Buh Cat an Buh Rat, dem leff, an Buh Fox, wuh bin de jedge,
eat all de cheese.

Wen tief git plunder, better fuh dem fuh share um mongst demself den
trus ter call een bigger rogue fur dewide um.




                                 XXIII.

                   BUH RABBIT AN DE TARRUH BEASTISES.

All de animel conjunct togedder fuh buil house an gedder dem winter
perwision. Buh Rabbit prommus fuh help, but wen dem call pon um fuh
help tote de pole and de bresh, him mek scuse, say him wife berry sick
and him bleege fuh tay home an nuss um. All dis bin a lie. Buh Rabbit,
him scheemy an lazy. Eh always ready fuh mek big brag bout wuh him
gwine do, but eh nebber does come up ter eh wud. Eh hate fuh wuk, an eh
lub fuh lib offer tarruh people labuh.

Wen de house done buil, de animel, dem fetch ebry man eh own perwision,
an pack um way een eh own place way eh kin git um wen fros fall, an de
grass done dead, an de tree done drap eh leaf an eh fruit. De Possum,
him bring an pile up pussimmun. De Squirle fetch eh hickry not an eh
acorn. De Deer, de Elephant, de Cow, dem gedder an pack way grass an
leaf. De Lion and de Tiger an de Wolf an all dem animel wuh lib offer
meat, dem ketch dem meat and dry um, an bring um an pit um way een
de house. De Bud, dem bring dem seed an dem wurrum. De Cooter, him
hab him corner too, an eh full um long him bittle. Wen ebry body done
gedder eh perwision, dem shet de do an gone ter dem house fuh ten ter
dem bidness an wait tel winter come, wen dem gwine lib offer wuh dem
bin pit way. Buh Rabbit, him bin a dodge bout way nobody kin shum, duh
notus wuh gwine on, an bin a mek eh plan.

Soon es de house full, an de do shet, an ebry body leff, eh slip een de
house an pit eh yeye on ebry ting, an mek up eh mine fuh lib topper wuh
all dem people bin gedder. Eh fix one bed fur ehself. Eh gedder water
in piggin an calabash fuh lass um, an den eh git two oncommon big horn,
an eh gone eenside an fassen up de do, an mek ehself saterfy. Eh lib
day, eh eat, eh sleep, eh pledjur ehself, an eh fine eh bittle right
ter eh han. Dis wuh Buh Rabbit lub. Nuttne mek um so merry es to lib
offer tarruh people.

Fros fall, an de animel biggin fuh tink bout dem perwision wuh dem bin
lay up een de house. Fus come de Deer, an eh try fuh open de do fuh
git ter him pile er grass. De do fastne. Buh Deer couldnt mek out how
dat. Eh knock ter de do. Eh knock. Eh knock. Bimeby Buh Rabbit--wuh
bin a yeddy um all de time--tek eh horn, an eh talk tru um fuh mek er
woice big, an eh say: “Wudduh dat?” Buh Deer, him sorter skittish, an
eh faid fuh trus ehself, an de big woice kinder skade um, but eh mek
out fuh answer: “Duh me, Buh Deer.” Den Buh Rabbit talk tru eh horn:
“Wuh you want yuh, anyhow?” Buh Deer answer: “Me want fuh come een fuh
git me bittle wuh me bin pit way fuh me fuh eat der winter.” Buh Rabbit
answer loud tru eh horn: “You cant come een.” Buh Deer quire: “Who you
day eenside?” Den Buh Rabbit tek eh biggis horn, an eh holler tru um so
loud eh mek de house shake: “Better man den ebber bin yuh befo.”

De woice so sewere Buh Deer skade, an eh leff, an eh gone tell all
dem tarruh animel say big Sperit gone tek de house way dem perwision
done gedder. De animel stonish, an dem all conclude fuh go een gang
ter de house an fine out wuh de ting yiz. Wen dem all gedder, dem
tell de Lion--wuh bin de king beast--fuh quire bout who day eenside.
Buh Lion, him gone ter de do. All de beastises tan roun fuh yeddy wuh
gwine happne. Buh Lion knock. No answer. Eh knock gen. No answer. Den
eh say: “Who duh dat day een yuh?” Buh Rabbit graff eh big horn, an
eh answer back tru um wid all eh strenk: “Better man den ebber bin yuh
befo.” De woice soun so outlandish, an eh come wid sich er big noise,
de beastises all conclude wuh Buh Deer bin tell dem bin so, an dat de
Sperit, him bin tek persession er de house. Dem faid fuh bus een de do,
an dem all gree fuh leff. Dem did leff, an dem yent fine out tel dis
day dat eh been Buh Rabbit wuh fool um, an dat no Sperit bin day none
tall.




                                  XXIV.

                   BUH WOLF, BUH RABBIT, AN DE BUTTER.

Buh Wolf, him hire Buh Rabbit fuh help um wuk eh crap. Eh crap, eh day
een de grass, an Buh Wolf faid eh gwine loss um. Befo dem state der
fiel, Buh Rabbit notus say Buh Wolf hab een him house er nice pan er
fresh butter. Eh mout water fuh git some, but eh shame fuh bague Buh
Wolf. Buh Rabbit, him berry lub fuh tief, an eh mek eh plan fuh git
some er dat butter.

Buh Wolf an Buh Rabbit done gone der fiel an tun een fuh wuk. De sun
hot, an befo long Buh Rabbit biggin fuh drap behine. Den all ob er
sutten eh trow down eh hoe, an eh look way off, an eh cock up eh yez,
an eh holler out: “Me yeddy you. Me duh comin.” Buh Wolf, him tun roun,
an eh say: “Buh Rabbit, wuh you duh do? You mus be der tun fool. Nobody
duh call you.” Buh Rabbit, him mek answer: “Somebody yiz bin er call
me, an me know who dem yiz, an wuffer dem duh call me. Enty you sabe me
duh preacher? Well, me prommus fuh bactize er chile dis berry hour, an
me mus go fuh keep me pintment.” “Berry well,” answer Buh Wolf, “dont
you loss no time, fuh dis crap want wuk berry bad.”

Buh Rabbit hop off luk eh bin gwine in anarruh direction from dat
wuh lead to Buh Wolf house. Wen eh git een de wood, eh slip roun
onbeknowinst ter Buh Wolf, an gone een him house an eat hebby outer de
pan er butter. Eh wipe eh mouf, an eh sukkle back tell eh git ter de
place een de fiel way eh bin leff eh hoe. Eh seem berry merry, an wen
Buh Wolf ax um ef he done bactize de chile, eh say yes. Den Buh Wolf ax
um wuh dem bin name de chile, an Buh Rabbit tell um say dem bin call um
_Fus Biginnin_.

Buh Wolf an Buh Rabbit wuk on. Dem binner hoe tetter. De butter sweeten
Buh Rabbit. Him couldnt stop from tink topper um. Eh biggin fuh want
mo. De mo eh study bout um de slower eh wuk. Buh Wolf call ter um an
tell um fuh hurry. Buh Rabbit mek answer an say eh yiz duh hurry.
Bless you soul! een a little while Buh Rabbit, him drap eh hoe an eh
holler out: “You right; me bin mose furgit; me comin right off.” Buh
Wolf, him stonish, an eh say: “Buh Rabbit, you must be loss you sense;
who you duh holler teh? Nobody duh call you.” Buh Rabbit mek answer:
“Somebody yiz bin a call me. Enty you yeddy um?” Buh Wolf say: “No, me
no yeddy.” Den Buh Rabbit up an tell um say eh hab gagement fur bactize
nurrur chile at dis berry hour, an eh mose bin furgit bout um tell
eh murrer an eh farruh holler ter um outer de wood an member um. Buh
Wolf mek jection gainst Buh Rabbit gwine, but wen Buh Rabbit tell um
de chile gwine loss ef eh no git bactize, Buh Wolf lem go. Buh Rabbit
do dist iz eh bin done befo. Eh gone een Buh Wolf house, eh tek down
de pan gen, an eh eat mona half de butter. Wen eh ketch de fiel, Buh
Wolf ax um ef eh done bactize tarruh chile, an eh answer eh yiz. Buh
Wolf say: “Duh him duh gal er boy?” Buh Rabbit mek answer say: “Him duh
gal.” “Wuh eh name?” questun Buh Wolf. “_Half-way_,” answer Buh Rabbit.

Dem wuk on tel de sun biggin fuh lean een de wes. Buh Rabbit still duh
study bout dat butter. Eh yent willin fuh go ter eh home an leff any
behine. So een de tree hour eh pit eh han up ter eh yez an eh listne.
Den eh holler out de turd time, an eh say: “Go on, me duh comin.” Buh
Wolf ax um. “Way you duh gwine now? Enty you done bactize chillun?” Buh
Rabbit tell um eh hab one mo fuh bactize befo sun down, but eh wunt
tek um long becase eh lib close by. Den Buh Rabbit slip roun ter Buh
Wolf house an clean up de las er de butter. Eh yent leff one grain een
de pan.

Wen eh git back Buh Wolf say: “You bactize dat chillun een er hurry;
wuh eh name?” Buh Rabbit up an tell um say eh name _Scrapin er de
bottom_. Buh Wolf, him nebber bin spicion wuh Buh Rabbit bin up teh. De
time come fuh knock off wuk, an wen Buh Wolf want fuh dock Buh Rabbit
fuh de time eh loss wen eh bin gone fuh bactize dem tree chillun, Buh
Rabbit plead so harde case him bin preacher, dat Buh Wolf, him furgib
um an pay um eh full wager. Den eh inwite Buh Rabbit fuh come long um
an tek supper wid um. But Buh Rabbit scuse ehself, an light out fer him
house, an leff Buh Wolf een de fiel. Buh Rabbit berry scheemy. Eh know
say ef eh did bin gone home wid Buh Wolf eh would er see eh track, an
fine out who eat eh butter, an dat eh would er lick um.




                                  XXV.

                         DE EAGLE AN EH CHILLUN.

De Eagle, him duh er wise bud. Eh mek eh nes on one tall pine tree
close de ribber, er de sea, way nuttne kin git at um. Eh saterfy wid
two chillun. Eh tek good care er um. Ebry hour eh fetch um snake an
fish, an eh garde um from win an rain an fowl-hawk, an mek um grow fas.
Wen eh wing kibber wid fedder an eh strong nough fur fly, wuh Buh Eagle
do? Eh wunt leff dem chillun een de nes fuh lazy an lib pon topper eh
farruh an eh murrer, but eh tek um on eh wing, an eh sail ober de sea,
an eh tell eh chillun: “De time come fuh you fuh mek you own libbin.
Me feed you long nough. Now you haffer look out fuh youself.” Wid dat,
eh fly from onder dem, an de noung bud, wen eh fine out eh murrer yent
gwine cahr um no furder, an dat dem haffer shif fuh demself, dem try eh
wing an sail off een de element duh hunt bittle.

People orter tek notus er Buh Eagle an do jes es him do. Wen you
chillun git big nough fuh wuk, mek um wuk. Dont leh um set bout de
house duh do nuttne, an duh spek eh farruh an eh murrer fuh fine bittle
an cloze fuh um. Ef you does, you chillun gwine mek you shame, an eh
will tun out berry triflin. Eh will keep you dead po, too.

Do same luk Buh Eagle. Mine you chillun well wen dem leetle; an soon es
dem big nough fuh wuk, mek um wuk.




                                  XXVI.

                   CHANTICLEER AN DE BAN-YAD ROOSTER.

You nebber bin see er finer bud den Buh Chanticleer. Eh fedder eh
glisten same luk silber een de sun. Eh step so high, an eh yent faid
nuttne. Wen eh crow you could yeddy um all tru de settlement. De hen
all lub um, an run ter um wenebber him call. Eh can lick all dem tarruh
rooster; an jist es soon es eh mek motion at dem, dem run.

Befo eh bin fine um out fuh true, day bin er big yaller Rooster een
de gang wuh try fuh spute Buh Chanticleer, an mek eh brag say eh kin
lick um. Dem fight. De big yaller Rooster couldnt tan up befo Buh
Chanticleer. Eh gaff um, eh pick um een eh back, eh knock um ober, an
eh run um out de yad.

Arter dat, de yaller Rooster faid fuh come nigh Buh Chanticleer. Eh run
ebry time eh see Buh Chanticleer duh walk towuds um, but eh hab a way
fuh debble Buh Chanticleer. Eh go way off, an ebry time eh yeddy Buh
Chanticleer flap eh wing an crow, him do de same. Soon a mornin wen Buh
Chanticleer crow fuh day, de big yaller Rooster, him crow too. De ting
bodder Buh Chanticleer, an eh want fuh kill um. Eh try hard fuh fine
out way eh roose. One day one er de hen wuh blanks ter Buh Chanticleer
fambly mek um sensible jist way de yaller Rooster blan roose. Den Buh
Chanticleer, him sen fuh Buh Fox. Eh come, an Buh Chanticleer ax um
say: “You want one fat Rooster fuh eat?” Buh Fox, him answer: “Yes, me
berry glad fuh git um, an heap er tenky ter you too.”

Den Buh Chanticleer tell um fuh come de fus moon-shiny night, an him
will show um way eh kin git a good supper. Buh Fox happy, an eh prommus
fuh come. Eh did come de fus moon-shiny night, an Buh Chanticleer gone
long um an pint out de big yaller Rooster duh sleep een one low cedar
tree. Buh Fox creep up easy, an graff um an eat um. Wen eh done eat um,
an eh duh lick eh mout, Buh Chanticleer ax um: “How you luk um?” Buh
Fox mek answer: “Me luk um berry well. Eh bin fat. Eh meat sweet. Me
luk um summuch me want mo.” Wid dat, an befo Buh Chanticleer kin mek
out wuh eh tend fuh do, eh jump pon topper Buh Chanticleer, an mash um
ter det, an eat um up.

Wen you want somebody fuh do you sarbis, call pon you fren, but dont
trus you eenemy fuh done um.




                                 XXVII.

                      BUH RABBIT AN DE GROUN-MOLE.

Day nebber bin a man wuh kin equel Buh Rabbit fuh mek plan fuh lib
offer tarruh people bedout wuk isself. Groun-mole, bin berry tick. On
ebry side dem bin er root up de tetter patch, and stroy pinder. Nobody
know how fuh ketch um, case eh wuk onder de groun, an wen you go fuh
fine um eh yent dedday.

Buh Rabbit, him see eh chance, an eh tell ebry body him know how fuh
stroy um. De ting come ter Buh Wolf yez, an eh sen fuh Buh Rabbit. Buh
Rabbit gone ter Buh Wolf, an eh tell um yes, him hab plan fuh clear
de fiel er Groun-mole, an dat him wunt charge Buh Wolf nuttne but him
board an lodgment wile him duh ketch an kill de Groun-mole. Buh Wolf,
him say Buh Rabbit berry kine, an eh gree fuh fine um. Den Buh Wolf hab
one nice bed mek up fuh Buh Rabbit, an eh tell eh wife fuh feed um well.

Buh Wolf hab some bidness wuh call um way from home, an eh spec fuh
gone bout one week. Eh leff Buh Rabbit fuh clean de Groun-mole outer eh
fiel, an den eh gone. Buh Rabbit, him well saterfy. Ebry mornin, arter
brukwus, eh mobe off luk eh bin gwine ter Buh Wolf fiel, an nobody shum
tel dinner time. Arter eh done eat er hebby dinner, eh gone gen tel
supper time, wen eh come back an eat er hebby supper, an den eh leddown
der bed.

Nobody kin see any Groun-mole wuh Buh Rabbit der ketch, but eh tell
Buh Wolf wife dat eh bin er kill heap er dem ebry day, an dat eh gwine
soon clear de fiel. De ting gone on dis way tel Buh Wolf tun home. Wen
eh retch eh house eh quire bout Buh Rabbit, an eh wife tell um wuh Buh
Rabbit bin er say an er do, an dat Buh Rabbit gone der fiel dist arter
brukwus. Buh Wolf say him gwine see fuh ehself wuh Buh Rabbit duh do,
an wuh plan eh fix fuh ketch de Groun-mole.

Wen eh git der fiel eh look up an down, an eh yent see no sign er Buh
Rabbit. Eh notus eh crap, an de Groun-mole duh eat um wus den nebber.
Eh sarche fuh Buh Rabbit track, an eh cant shum no way. Buh Wolf mek up
eh mine dat Buh Rabbit yent do de fus ting een de fiel. De sun hot. Buh
Wolf gone een de edge er de wood, an day eh come pon topper Buh Rabbit
tretch out een er bed wuh eh bin mek outer pine straw onder one tree,
fas tersleep. Eh yent bin study bout Buh Wolf, er de Groun-mole wuh bin
er bodder de fiel. Buh Wolf slip up, an eh graff um tight. Buh Rabbit
so skade eh furgit fuh lie, an Buh Wolf mek um confess eh yent know how
fuh ketch Groun-mole, dat eh nebber did kill none, an dat eh bin lib
offer Buh Wolf bittle ebber sence eh leff.

Buh Wolf, him so bex eh git grape wine an eh tie Buh Rabbit han an
foot, an eh lick um tel eh tired. All dis time Buh Rabbit bin eh holler
an er bague. At lenk Buh Wolf loose um, an run um offer de place.

Eh yent offen Buh Rabbit ketch at him trick, but eh meet eh match dis
time.




                                 XXVIII.

                       BUH RABBIT AN DE ROCK-SOUP.

Anurrer way Buh Rabbit hab fuh mek eh libbin bedout wuk bin dis. Eh hab
een eh pocket er pooty, smoode rock, bout de size ob er tukrey agg. Wid
dem people wuh no quaintun wid um eh pass ehself off fuh er fus-class
cook, an eh tell um say eh hab one rock wuh mek pruppus fuh gie soup de
bes tase; an dat de soup wuh mek long dat rock sweeter den all edder
soup.

Eh gone ter Buh Bear house, an Buh Bear hearky ter um, an gage um fuh
mek some soup long eh rock. Buh Rabbit pit on de pot, an eh bile water
een um long de stone. Den eh call fuh meat, an wegetable, an all kind
er seaznin, an eh stir um an eh cook um all togerrur, an eh did mek er
nice soup. Eh fool Buh Bear, an eh mek um bliebe say eh bin de rock
wuh gib sich er rich flaber ter de soup, wen de fac bin say de rock
yent hab nuttne fuh do long um, but de tarruh ting wuh gone een de pot,
dem duh de ting wuh mek de soup. Buh Rabbit git big dinner at Buh Bear
house dat day.

Anurrer time, wen eh bin berry hongry, eh gone ter Buh Cooter house, an
eh fool um same fashion, an eh git er hebby dinner day too.

Eh do dis way fuh some time, guine from house teh house.

At lenk eh miss an gone ter Buh Fox house, an tell um bout eh
rock-soup. Buh Fox, him no fool. Him duh er smate man, an eh see tru de
ting right off. But eh yent leh Buh Rabbit see dat eh spicion anyting,
an eh tell um fuh go head an mek eh soup. Eh han out wuhebber Buh
Rabbit call fuh, an eh wait topper um tel de soup done. Den eh tase um,
an wen eh fine eh tase same luk any edder soup mek long de ting wuh eh
han Buh Rabbit fuh pit een de pot, eh tek Buh Rabbit rock, an eh trow
um down de well, an eh cuss Buh Rabbit fur er swindler, an mek um shame
befo all eh fambly, an mek um leff.

Buh Rabbit an Buh Fox, bofe er dem berry cunnin, but dis time Buh Fox
him cunnin moner Buh Rabbit.




                                  XXIX.

                         DE TWO FREN AN DE BEAR.

Two fren, dem bin a mek one journey togerruh. Dem haffer go tru one
tick swamp wuh full er bear an edder warmint. Dem prommus fuh tan ter
one anurrer, an help one anurrer out ef de warmint should tack dem. Dem
yent bin git half way tru de swamp wen one big black Bear jump outer de
bush an mek fur dem. Steader one er dem tan fur help fight um, eh leff
eh fren an clime one tree. De tarruh fren bin yeddy say Bear no gwine
eat dead people, so him leddown on de groun, an hole eh bref, an shet
eh yeye, an mek out say him bin dead. De Bear come up ter um, an smell
um, an tun um ober, an try fuh ketch eh bref. Wen eh fine eh cant ketch
eh bref, eh gone off leely way an eh watch um. Den eh tun back an smell
um gen, an notus um close. At lenk eh mek up eh mine say de man bin
dead fuh true; an wid dat eh leff um fuh good an gone back der wood.
All dis time de tarruh fren duh squinch ehself up een de tree duh watch
wuh bin gwine on. Eh dat skade eh wunt do nuttne fuh help eh fren, er
try fuh run de Bear off.

Wen eh fine de Bear done gone fuh sho, eh holler ter him fren say:
“Wuh de Bear bin tell you? Him an you seem luk you bin hab close
combersation.” Den eh fren mek answer: “Eh bin tell me nebber fuh trus
nobody wuh call ehself fren, an wuh gwine run luk er coward soon es
trouble come.”




                                  XXX.

                           DE OLE MAN AN DET.

One Ole Man bin berry tired long wuk. Him want fuh stop an tek eh
pledjur all day een him house. Eh bex long de Buckra wuh gie um task,
an mek um ten ter um. Eh constant duh pray, so people kin yeddy um, dat
Det would come an cahr way eh Mossa, an eh Mistis, an de Obersheer.
De Obersheer him yeddy wuh de Ole Man bin a pray fuh, an eh tell de
Mossa, an dem fix plan fuh hab fun long de Ole Man. Wen night come, an
ebryting on de plantation done gone bed, de Mossa, him tek one long
white gown wuh ketch down ter eh foot, an eh pit um on, an eh gone ter
de Ole Man house. Eh push de do open, an day bin de Ole Man duh siddown
on eh bench duh nod by de fire. De Ole Man yeddy say some body come
ter him do, an wen eh tun roun fuh look, eh see one tall somebody all
wrop up head an yez een white. Eh git skade, an tink duh Sperit. Eh
quire: “Who duh dat?” De Sperit, wuh bin de Mossa dress up een de white
gown wuh kibber um all ober, mek answer way down een him troat: “Duh
me, Det, wuh you bin a pray fuh.” Den de Ole Man say: “You come fuh
Mossa?” De Sperit shake eh head. Eh say gen: “You come fuh Mistis?” De
Sperit shake eh head gen. De Ole Man quire gen: “Den you musser come
fuh de Obersheer?” De Sperit shake eh head gen. De Ole Man rale skade
now, an eh study fuh leely while, an den eh questun gen: “Ef you no
come fuh Mossa, ner Mistis, ner de Obersheer, who de Debbie you come
fuh?” Den de Sperit, eh bow eh head low an eh mek answer: “Me come fuh
you.” De Ole Man hair rise. Eh git up. Eh bus tru de back do. Eh run
tru de gaden, an eh mek fuh de wood. Nobody yent shum tel arter brukwus
next mornin, an den eh tell ebry body say Det bin come fur um last
night, but dat him bin dodge um. Arter dat nobody ebber yeddy um mek no
mo prayer bout Det.




                                  XXXI.

                           DE KING AN EH RING.

One time dere was a King wuh bin done git marry, an eh bin hab one fine
Ring wuh him bin call eh gagement Ring. Dat King, him bin hab tree
serbant wuh wait bout him table, an clean him shoes, an do wuhebber
him want um fuh do. Dem bin tek tun een clean de shoes. One clean um
one mornin, anurrur one clean um nex mornin, an de edder one clean um
de nex. One er dem serbant tief de King Ring. De King try fuh fine out
which one er de tree bin tek um, an eh fail. Dem wunt tell topper one
anurrur, an de ting bodder de King berry bad. Eh faid say ef eh cant
git back eh gagement Ring all eh good luck gwine leff um. Eh call een
eh fren an wise man fuh help um pint out de tief an fine dat Ring, an
dem cant.

One day de King notus er strange man duh walk bout him gaden, an eh
sen an hab um brung ter um. Wen eh questun um, de man tell um say him
bin a po man, an dat eh mek eh libbin by cunjur. De King tell um eh
bin dis de man eh duh hunt fur, an eh want um fuh fine eh Ring. Eh mek
um quaintun bout wen de Ring tuk, an who eh tink tief um; an eh say
eh gwine gie um fibe day time fuh pint out de man wuh bin tek de Ring,
an mek um tun um. Mo na dat, eh prommus um big money ef eh git back de
Ring widin de fibe day; but eh treaten um fuh kill um ef eh fail fuh
fine um eenside dat time. Eh charge eh serbant fuh tek good care er de
conjur man, an feed um high.

De rale name er dis cunjur man bin _Robin_, but him yent bin gib dis
name ter de King.

De cunjur man try fuh fine out de tief, but eh miss. Four day gone,
an de Ring yent fine. De cunjur man, him berry sad, an eh faid say eh
gwine fail, an de King gwine tek eh head off.

De mornin ob de fibe day de King git up soon, an pledjur ehself by
tek er walk een eh gaden. Wile eh duh tan onder one berry tree, one
robin-red-bres, wuh bin er eat de berry, choke an fall der groun. De
King pick um up, an eh dead in eh han. Den eh tek um, an wrop um up
een eh henkerchef, an pit um een eh hat. Eh sen fuh de cunjur man, an
eh tell um eh time mose out, an dat ef eh no fine de Ring by sundown
eh gwine kill um. Eh say ter um, moöber, dat eh doubt um, an dat eh
yent bliebe eh kin cunjur none tall; dat ef eh kin cunjur eh mus tell
um right off wuh eh got een him hat. De cunjur man so skade eh yent say
nuttne cept pity ehself, an say: “Po Robin! Po Robin!” De King tek um
say eh bin mean de bud, an eh confidance rise, an eh mek answer: “You
right, me yiz hab one robin een me hat; an becase you tell true, me
gwine gie you six day mo fuh fine out who tief de Ring.” De cunjur man
rale glad, an de ting mek de King an all eh fren an de serbant bliebe
say eh kin cunjur fur true. De tree serbant wuh bin een cohoot fuh tief
de Ring, an wuh bin know all bout um, biggin fuh faid say dem bin gwine
fuh git fine out.

De nex mornin, wen one er dem serbant come down wid de King shoes, de
cunjur man pint eh finger at um an eh say: “You duh one er de tief.” De
man look condemn, but eh mek answer, say: “Him yent.” De nex mornin wen
de tarrur serbant fetch de King shoes down fuh clean um, de cunjur man
pint him finger at um an eh say: “You duh nudder one er dem tief.” De
man rale skade, but eh schway say him yent know nuttne bout de Ring. De
nex mornin wen de edder serbant duh clean de King shoes, de cunjur man
gone up ter um an pint eh finger right een eh face, an eh say: “You duh
de tird man wuh know bout dis Ring an help fuh tief um.” De man yeye
fall, but him wouldnt confess.

Dat same ebenin all tree dem serbant, dem come ter de cunjur man an
fetch de Ring, an confess say dem been tek um, an dem bague de cunjur
man fuh fix plan fuh clear dem. Him so glad him git de Ring him prommus
fuh do dist as dem say. So eh tell dem fuh fetch one big tukrey-gobbler
ter um. Dem gone an ketch de biggis een de gang, an brung um ter de
cunjur man. Eh tek de Ring an eh mix um long cornflour, an eh poke em
een de tukrey-gobbler craw. Den eh mark de bud so him kin know um gen,
an eh tun um loose.

De cunjur man, him gone right off ter de King, an eh tell um say him
kin pint out way de Ring day. De King, him berry glad, an eh collec all
him fren fuh see de cunjur man pint out de Ring. Wen dem all gedder,
de conjur man, him ax de King fuh hab all him tukrey dribe befo um. De
King him do so, an as de tukrey bin er walk pass, de conjur man pint
out one big tukrey-gobbler an tell de King say him hab de Ring een
him craw. Wid dat, de King mek one er him serbant ketch de gobbler an
rip open eh craw, an day, sho nuff, was de Ring. De King, him bin so
rejoice eh gib high praise ter de cunjur man, an eh gie um big money,
an mek um rich. De tree serbant too, wuh bin de tief, dem so happy
cause de cunjur man yent spose dem ter de King dat dem mek present ter
um too, an bin eh fren all dem life.




                                 XXXII.

             BUH LION, BUH RABBIT, BUH FOX, AN BUH ROCCOON.

Buh Lion, him bin keep er bank. Een dat bank him hab chicken, en
hog, en sheep. Buh Fox, him marry ter Buh Coon darter. Buh Fox
farruh-een-law, him bin er rogue. Buh Coon an Buh Rabbit mek er plan
fuh rob Buh Lion bank, an dem usen fuh tek ting outer um ebry now en
den, an nobody kin fine out who duh de tief. Buh Fox, Buh Rabbit, an
Buh Coon, dem day fas fren, an dem constant keep compny. Buh Rabbit him
tell Buh Lion, say him know de man wuh duh rob him bank, but eh yent
want talk eh name, an eh vise Buh Lion fuh set steel trap fuh ketch
de tief. Buh Lion do es him say, an de nex night, wen Buh Coon, Buh
Fox, an Buh Rabbit gone fuh rob de bank gen, Buh Coon, him walk topper
de trap an eh ketch um by eh foot. De ting broke Buh Coon leg, an eh
hot um berry bad, but eh faid fuh holler, case, ef eh did holler, eh
know Buh Lion gwine run day an kill um. So eh leddown an moan, an beg
eh fren fuh help um. Buh Fox an Buh Rabbit, dem study ober de ting,
an dem mek up dem mine say ef Buh Lion fine Buh Coon een de trap, eh
not only gwine kill Buh Coon, but eh will sen an kill all eh fambly.
Den dem conclude dat de bes ting fuh do bin dat Buh Fox--wuh bin him
son-een-law--mus tek one swode an chop Buh Coon head off an bury um,
an dat eh skin Buh Coon an bury eh hide an eh cloze, an leff Buh Coon
nekked een de trap, so nobody kin tell who bin ketch.

Buh Fox, him do es dem gree. De nex mornin wen Buh Lion zamine eh trap,
eh fine de tief done ketch. Eh call een eh fren fuh consult, but es de
body done strip, an eh head done cut off an gone, nobody could mek up
eh mine who de tief bin. Buh Lion, him say him gwine fine out who de
tief yiz, an who de man wuh cut eh head off an skin um.

Buh Rabbit, him come up bout dis time, an him swade Buh Lion fuh sen
fuh one cart, an pit de dead body een um, an leh one er eh han heng
ober one side er de cart, an gedder him soldier an pit one gang on de
leff han side an de tarruh gang on de right han side, an mek de music
go befo, an leh dem all march down de middle er de street een Buh Lion
town all de lenk er de street; an ef de soldier yeddy anybody duh
scream an duh cry een any one er de house, den de soldier mus go ter
dat house an kill ebry body wuh lib day, case dat mus be de fambly er
de tief. Buh Lion, him well please, an him gie order, an hab de ting
done jes es Buh Rabbit bin plan.

Wen de compny bin er march wid de dead body er de tief een de cart, jes
es dem come befo de do er de house way Buh Fox lib, wuh bin marry Buh
Roccoon darter, him wife bin er look outer de winder, an eh see eh pa
han duh heng ober de side er de cart, an eh know um, an eh holler an
scream an fall down an faint way. Den de soldier wuh bin on de right
han side er de cart, dem run ter de house way dem yeddy de screamin an
de hollerin, an dem bus een de do an gone een fuh kill de whole fambly.
Buh Fox, wen eh see wuh happne, tek one knife an eh cut off one er him
finger, an eh run to de do, an eh meet de soldier, an eh show um eh
han der bleed, an eh tell um say eh bin dis loose one er eh finger, an
eh wife dat scade wen eh see wuh happne ter um, dat eh holler an faint
way. So Buh Fox fool de soldier, an dem gone back an jine de compny
an march on. Dat night dem camp een de en er de street, an halfer de
soldier bin on one side de cart, an tarruh half bin on tarruh side duh
guade de body er de tief wuh head cut off.

Wen Buh Fox wife come teh, eh spicion say Buh Fox bin know who kill
eh pa,--wuh bin Buh Roccoon,--an eh tell eh husbun, Buh Fox, say ef
eh dont git eh pa body an bring um ter um dat berry night, eh gwine
tell Buh Lion him bliebe de one wuh cut eh farruh--Buh Coon--head off
an hide um, duh eh own husbun,--Buh Fox. Buh Fox tell um say him yent
know nuttne bout de ting, an eh try fuh swade um no fuh go nigh Buh
Lion. Wen eh fine eh wife mine done mek up, an no way fuh him fuh git
out cept fuh fetch Buh Coon body ter eh wife, eh gone ter Buh Rabbit
fuh vise um an fuh help um. Buh Rabbit, him yeddy all wuh Buh Fox hab
fuh say, an den eh say: “Me tell you wuh you do. To-night gwine cole.
Dem soldier duh camp der street, an dem yent hab no fire. Dem berry lub
rum. Bout middle night you tek you horse an you paint one side er um
white, an de tarruh side er um black. You cahr two jug er rum, an you
ride ter de camp, an you gie one jug ter de gang er soldier wuh day on
de right, an de edder jug ter de tarruh gang wuh day on de leff, an wen
dem drunk you kin tek Buh Coon body outer de cart an cahr um home.”

Buh Fox, him wrop him head an yez up so nobody kin know um, an eh paint
eh horse one side white an tarruh side black, an eh tek eh two jug er
rum an eh ride ter de camp, an eh do dis es Buh Rabbit bin tell um fuh
do. De soldier, dem berry glad fuh git de rum. Dem tink two man fetch
um,--one duh ride er white horse, an de edder duh ride er black horse.
Dem drink tell dem drunk, an den Buh Fox slip way wid Buh Coon body
ter eh wife house, an him an eh wife bury um een de gaden same night
onbeknowinst ter ebry body.

De nex mornin wen de soldier wake up, de cart day day, but de body
done gone. De soldier wuh camp on de leff, dem say de man wuh ride on
er white horse mus er tief um; an de soldier wuh camp on de right, dem
say de man wuh ride on er black horse him mus er tief um. So Buh Fox
cuhfuse dem two gang er soldier, an dem nebber did fine um out.

Buh Rabbit, him scheemy mona all dem tarruh cretur. Him do all dis, an
yet him stay fren wid Buh Lion, Buh Fox, an wid Buh Coon fambly.




                                 XXXIII.

                   BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE PORPUS.

Ebber sence dat time wen Buh Wolf ketch Buh Rabbit duh tief water outer
him spring, an eh bin tie um ter de spakleberry bush an lick um, Buh
Rabbit hate Buh Wolf an mek plan fuh git eben wid um.

Dem all two lub fish. Buh Rabbit an Buh Porpus bin good fren, an many
er time Buh Porpus blan gie Buh Rabbit some er de fish wuh him der
ketch. One day, Buh Porpus, him bin berry lucky een eh fishin, an eh
fetch fuh Buh Rabbit mo ner two quart er gannet mullet, and blow um on
de bank way Buh Rabbit kin git um dout wet eh foot. Buh Rabbit, him
tell um heap er tenky, an eh cahr um ter him house. Befo eh part compny
wid Buh Porpus, eh tell um how Buh Wolf bin ketch um an tie um an lick
um, how eh bex long Buh Wolf, an how eh want Buh Porpus fuh help um fuh
punish Buh Wolf. Den dem mek plan lucker dis: Buh Porpus bin fuh come
back ter de same place nex day an leh Buh Rabbit tie grapewine roun um,
so Buh Wolf kin pull um outer de water fuh eat um. Wen Buh Wolf tek eh
holt fuh pull Buh Porpus outer de water, den Buh Porpus wus teh mek
eh flut an juk Buh Wolf een de ribber an drown um. So dey gree, an Buh
Rabbit gone home long eh fish.

Wen eh git ter eh house eh sen one er him gal to Buh Wolf house fuh
tell um him hab some nice fish, an ter eenwite Buh Wolf an him fambly
fuh tek brukwus long um nex mornin. Buh Wolf, him well please, an eh
say him an eh fambly gwine come wid pledjur.

Dem did come. De fish sweet. Buh Wolf, him an eh wife an eh chillun joy
um berry much. Buh Wolf ax Buh Rabbit way eh git de fish, an Buh Rabbit
tell um say him fren, Buh Porpus, blan ketch um fur um, an dat him hab
er pintment dat berry day wid Buh Porpus. Buh Wolf bague Buh Rabbit fuh
leh him go long too, an see ef him couldnt mek rangement wid Buh Porpus
fuh fine him een fish. Buh Rabbit say him willin; so dem finish brukwus
an gone fuh meet Buh Porpus.

Es dem duh gwine Buh Rabbit tell Buh Wolf say Porpus meat berry nice,
an eh tink mebbe dem kin ketch Buh Porpus an eat um. Buh Wolf quire:
“How you gwine do um?” Den Buh Rabbit, him mek answer: “Me tell you
how we gwine wuk dis ting. Me good fren ter Buh Porpus, an wen we git
ter de ribber bank me gwine tell Buh Porpus leh we hab er game, an see
who kin pull de strongis. Den we will tek er grape-wine an tie um roun
Buh Porpus head, an you an me will tek turrer een, an we sholy kin drag
Buh Porpus outer de ribber; an wen we git um out eh gwine dead, an we
will hab heap er bittle fuh eat.” Buh Wolf, him no bin know de plan wuh
Buh Rabbit aready done fix wid Buh Porpus, an so eh gree ter all wuh
Buh Rabbit bin say.

Wen dem git ter de ribber bank, day was Buh Porpus duh wait fur Buh
Rabbit. Buh Rabbit mek um quaintum wid Buh Wolf, an arter er while Buh
Wolf ax Buh Porpus fuh fine um een fish same luk eh fine Buh Rabbit, an
Buh Porpus gree fur do so. Den Buh Rabbit, him say: “Leh we hab some
fun, an see who kin pull de strongis: Buh Porpus genst me an Buh Wolf.”
Buh Porpus say him willin. Wid dat, Buh Rabbit git one long grape-wine,
an eh tie one een roun Buh Porpus head, an de tarruh een eh tie fus
roun Buh Wolf body, an den roun him own; but eh leff de een loose, so
him kin slip out. Den eh gie de wud fuh pull. Es eh done dat eh slip
outer de wine, an leff Buh Wolf lone fuh pull genst Buh Porpus. At
de fus, wen Buh Porpus ease isself off een de ribber, eh pull sorter
light, an den eh gie way, and Buh Wolf, him tought him gwine outpull
um. But een er leely while Buh Porpus sorter hump eh back an flut eh
tail, an yuh Buh Wolf come fuh de water. Eh dig eh paw een de san, an
eh holler ter Buh Rabbit fuh tun um loose; but Buh Rabbit wouldnt tetch
um, an so Buh Porpus drag um, duh scuffle an duh holler, clean een de
ribber an onder de water, an drown Buh Wolf. Arter dat Buh Porpus swim
back ter de bank an Buh Rabbit tek off de grape-wine from roun eh neck,
an dem leff Buh Wolf een de water fuh shark an alligatur fuh eat.

Buh Rabbit an Buh Porpus done Buh Wolf er mean trick.




                                 XXXIV.

                         DE DEBBLE AN MAY BELLE.

De Debble, him kin tek all sorter shape fuh cahr out him plan an fool
people. Sometime eh mek isself inter wolf fuh kill you sheep. Narruh
time eh tek de shape er alligatur fuh worry you duck an goose. Den
eh look lucker white deer, an eh fly tru de wood, dout mek no noise,
fuh skade people duh walk long de big road. Den eh come same lucker
owl, an eh holler down you chimbly an eh tarrify ebry body wen dem duh
tun flour een de pot. Den wen you sick, eh gone eensider you lucker a
wurrum, an eh gie you all sorter misry. Den gen, eh kin tek de shape
er man, en pass isself off fur great gentleman long de lady. Day yent
nuttne wuh de Debble cant do ef eh mek up eh mine ter um.

One time day was a berry pooty noung ooman name May Belle. Him farruh
bin rich, an eh dress um up ter de notch, an eh gie um saddle horse
fuh ride, an carriage fuh dribe, an plenty er serbant fuh wait on um,
an ebry good bittle fuh eat, an rockin-chair fuh set een, an orgin fuh
play topper. All de noung man een de county bin er cote um an er try
fuh marry um.

One day one strange man come fuh wisit um. Eh dress up better ner all
dem tarruh gentlemans. Eh hab on new beber hat, wuh shine lucker glass,
an eh hab side whisker comb so nice, an glub on eh han, an new cloze,
an eh dribe up een er fine carriage wid four horse, an de driber hab er
keen lash wuh pop so clear you could yeddy um way down de road.

De noung lady tek wid um right off. Eh hab sich er good manners, an
eh talk so perlite, an eh ack so rich, ebry body gie way ter um, an
eh outshine all dem tarruh Buckra wuh bin er cote de gal, an eh marry
um befo de week out, an eh tek um een eh carriage, an eh dribe um off
ter him house. Dat house bin een er deestant part er de country, buil
on er hill. Nobody bin lib close. Eh bin de fines house een de whole
settlement. Eh hab piazza all roun an roun, an eenside ebry ting look
berry nice an pooty.

Wen dem dribe up ter de step, de Debble, wuh bin de husbun, han eh
Bride een de pahler, an set um een one rockin-chair, an tell um de
whole house blanks ter um, an eh mus mek isself saterfy an joy isself.

Ebry ting gone long berry well fur some time, an de noung wife hab ebry
ting him call fur. One mornin, wen eh husbun leff de house fur ten ter
eh bidness, an eh wife bin er ramble bout de room, eh fine one key duh
heng up by isself. Eh wonder wuh key dat, an wuh do eh open. Eh tek um
an eh try one lock arter anurrer, but de key wunt fit. Bimeby eh gone
duh garret, an eh see one do up day wuh bin lock. Eh pit de key ter de
hole an eh onlock de do, an wen eh open um lo! an behole! eh see een de
closet tree noung ooman duh heng up long dem neck, an dem bin all dead.
De ting skade de gal so bad eh scacely hab han fuh shet de do an lock
um gen. But arter a while eh manage fuh do dat, an den eh mek hase an
heng de key way eh bin fine um. De Bride faid fuh ax eh husbun bout de
ting. All eh joy done gone. Eh want fuh git way, but him dunno how fuh
do um. Eh yent hab nobody fuh truss fuh sen ter eh farruh an bredder
fuh come an tek um way.

Eh husbun bin gen um one nice ridin horse fuh tek eh pledjur long ebry
mornin an ebenin. De Debble so busy eh wife haffer ride by isself. De
po gal yent say nuttne ter nobody bout wuh eh see een de closet der
garret. Eh hide eh feelin, but eh berry onsaterfy een eh mine.

De nex mornin, wen eh bin er tek eh ride, soon es eh git outer yearin,
eh biggin fuh cry, an fuh pity isself, an say eh wish eh bin back ter
eh farruh house, an talk eh mine dat eh faid eh husbun, wen eh git
tired long um, gwine kill um an heng um long de tarruh ooman wuh day
een de closet duh garret. Him no know de horse wuh him duh ride bin
a yeddy um, an duh notus wuh him duh say. All ob er sutten de horse
open eh mout, an eh ax eh missis: “Enty you know who you marry ter?
You husbun duh de Debble, an wen eh saterfy long you eh gwine bex wid
you an kill you same luk eh done kill dem tarruh wife wuh eh bin hab
befo eh bring you yuh.” De po ooman dat skade eh ready fuh fall off.
Eh mose faint way. Eh heart duh flutter een eh bres. All eh strenk gie
way. Eh cry. Eh gib up fuh loss. Den eh bague de horse fuh pity um, an
help um, an tek um back ter him fambly. De horse sorry fur um, an eh
prommus fuh try an sabe um, but eh tell um fuh keep eh mout shet, an
mek no rackit bout de ting. Mo na dat, eh tell um, de nex mornin wen eh
come fuh ride, eh mus fetch een eh pocket four big nail wuh day on de
mantlepiece een de Debble room, an dem will help um fuh git way.

De po ooman tenk um berry much, an dem gone back an nobody bin know
bout dis plan. De nex mornin wen de Debble, wuh bin him husbun, leff
de house an gone fuh mine eh bidness, eh wife fine de nail dis es de
horse bin say, an eh pit um een eh pocket. Den eh call fuh him ridin
horse same luk eh ebber done, an eh gone down de road fuh ride. Soon es
eh git outer de sight er de house, de good horse eh men eh pace; an,
befo de middle er de day, eh tell eh missis fuh drap one er dem nail
een de road. Eh missis did drap um, an right off one big bank er san
riz up clean cross de road, so nobody could dribe ober. Wen night come
on dem drap anurrur nail, middle night anurrer, an es de sun duh rise
dem drap de las one. Ebry time de nail drap, de big bank er san rise up
an shet up de road. De horse run so fas eh retch de ooman farruh house
by brukwus time een de mornin. Eh fambly stonish fuh see um, an wen eh
tell dem wuh mek eh come back, eh farruh an eh bredder git dem gun fur
shoot de Debble ef eh come fuh tek de gal back.

Wen de Debble fine out say eh wife yent come back from ride, eh biggin
fuh spicion someting; an arter dinner eh git een eh carriage fuh hunt
eh wife. Eh tek de big road, an eh mek eh driber pit de lick ter de
horse, but eh cant see ner yeddy nuttne bout eh wife. Bimeby eh come
pon topper de fus bank er san een de road, an den him bin know right
off wuh happne. Eh mek eh horse grabble tru, an den eh dribe straight
fur eh farruh-een-law house. Eh blow eh hot bref behine eh horse, an eh
mek um run lucker de win. Eh haffer stop fuh git tru dem tarruh bank
er san wuh de edder nail bin mek, an so eh loss eh time an nebber did
obertek eh wife. Wen eh tun een de abnue wuh lead ter eh wife farruh
house, eh see eh wife an all eh fambly day een de piazza duh watch de
road. Eh farruh-een-law an eh bredder-een-law hab gun een dem han. De
Debble, him no faid gun, an eh dribe right up, an eh ax eh wife wuh
mek um run way. Befo eh kin answer, eh tell um fuh git right een de
carriage an go back home long um. Eh wife say eh wunt, an eh hole on
ter eh farruh. Den de Debble git berry bex an schway say him gwine cahr
um any how. Wid dat, eh light outer de carriage an mek fuh de piazza
fuh graff eh wife. Eh farruh an eh bredder tell um fuh tan back an leh
de gal lone. De Debble wunt yeddy dem, an es eh rise de step de farruh
an de bredder er de noung ooman shoot de Debble long buck-shot. De shot
drap offer um dout hot um, an eh come right on. Dist es eh bin guine
tek de gal eh change eh mine, an eh tun ter eh old self, wid eh forky
tail, an eh claw, an eh batwing, an eh owl yez, an eh blow fire outer
eh mout, an eh bun up eh wife, an him farruh, an him murrer, an him
bredder, an de house, an ebry ting wuh day een um. Not a ting leff fuh
show way de house bin. Eh bun up de horse too wuh bin help eh wife fuh
run way. Den eh change back ter de shape er a man dist es befo, an eh
git een him carriage, an eh dribe back ter him house same luk nuttne
bin happne.

“De Debble,” added Daddy Cudjo, as he concluded this story, “duh de
wus ting een dis wul an de nex. Me nebber gwine hab nuttne fuh do long
um. Me faid um wus den rattlesnake; an dat ting wuh dem call Hell, me
nebber wan shum ner go nigh um.”




                                  XXXV.

                         DE OLE MAN AN DE COON.

One time er rich Buckra hab er senserble ole man serbant wuh come from
Afreka. Dis ole nigger bin know ebryting bout ebryting. Nobody could
tun um wid questun. Eh Mossa try um heap er time, an eh ebber did mek
right answer. Eh fren try um too, an dem nebber ketch um duh miss. De
Buckra brag heaby on de ole man, an berry offne eh win bet topper um.
One day de Buckra man gen er big dinner, an eh eenwite heap er fren ter
him house. Eh lay er wager say nobody kin ax eh ole serbant er questun
wuh him couldnt answer, an eh gie eh fren lief fuh try de ole man any
fashion dem want. De money pit up, an de fren call one boy, wuh bin
er wuk bout de lot, an dem sen um der wood fuh ketch one coon. De boy
gone wid eh dog. Wen dinner done ober, an de gentlemans duh set een
de piazza duh talk, de boy come back wid er roccoon. Dem call fuh er
barrel, an dem tek de coon an pit um een an head um up complete, so
nobody kin see wuh day eenside.

Den dem sen fuh de ole Afreka nigger. Eh bin er hoe cotton der fiel, an
nobody bin tell um wuh mek dem sen fuh um. Eh come; an den eh Mossa
say: “Ole man, we sen fuh you fuh tell we wuh day een dis barrel.” De
ole man look at um, an walk roun um, an notus um close, an listne fuh
see ef eh could yeddy anyting duh mobe. All de gentlemans duh watch
um. Wen de ole man mek up eh mine eh couldnt fine out wuh day een de
barrel, eh stop, eh study, eh cratch eh head, an den eh mek answer:
“Mossa, hoona done head de ole coon dis time.”

Eh no bin know say him bin er speak er true wud bout wuh bin een de
barrel. Eh bin er talk bout ehself wen eh say dem bin head de ole coon
dis time, but eh Mossa an de tarruh gentlemans no know, and dem all gie
de ole man big praise. Eh Mossa win de bet, an eh share de silber money
wid de ole man.




                                 XXXVI.

                       BUH RABBIT AN DE CRAWFISH.

Arter Buh Wolf bin lick Buh Rabbit an trow um een de brier patch case
eh ketch um der tief water outer him spring, Buh Rabbit faid fuh meet
Buh Wolf, an him leff an gone buil ehself new house een Buh Bear
settlement. Buh Bear, him hab well, an steader Buh Rabbit fine him own
water, eh blan slip ter Buh Bear well an tief water outer um. Buh Bear
fine dis out, but Buh Rabbit so scheemy Buh Bear couldnt pit eh han
topper um fuh ketch um. So eh git one big crawfish an eh pit um een de
well, an eh tell um fuh gard de well, an fastne ebrybody wuh come day
fuh tief water.

De nex time Buh Rabbit gone der well long him calabash fuh git some
water, de fus ting eh know de crawfish grab um by eh tail. Buh Rabbit
holler, an een eh pull way eh leff eh tail een de crawfish claw. An dat
de way Buh Rabbit come fuh loss eh tail. Eh tail stumpy tel dis day.




                                 XXXVII.

                       BUH RABBIT AN BUH ELEPHUNT.

You ebber notus say Buh Elephunt yez all de time duh heng down, an eh
cant cock um up luk de tarruh creetuh? Eh hinge to eh yez look luk eh
broke. You know wuh mek so? Ef you yent know, lemme tell you.

Buh Rabbit an Buh Elephunt, dem blan ramble tru de same wood. Buh
Rabbit, him lib offer de noung grass, an Buh Elephunt, him eat de tree
limb. Dem bin quaintun wid one anurrur; an, weneber dem meet, dem nusen
fuh pass de time er day. Buh Rabbit, him too leetle fuh Buh Elephunt
fuh keep compny long.

Een de spring er de year Buh Rabbit bin mek eh nes onder one bush,
an eh line um an eh kibber um ober complete long sofe dry grass. Eh
hab tree leely chillun een dat nes. One day Buh Elephunt bin er hunt
eh bittle, an eh gone miss an mash topper Buh Rabbit nes, an kill eh
chillun. Buh Rabbit no bin day at de time, an wen eh git back eh fine
eh nes done broke up, an all tree eh chillun squash flat. Eh see by
de track say Buh Elephunt bin do dat. Eh gone right off an eh tackle
Buh Elephunt bout um. Buh Elephunt mek answer an say him yent do um;
him yent know nuttne bout um. Wen Buh Rabbit fine eh cant git no
saterfaction outer Buh Elephant, eh cut down, an eh berry bex, an eh
mek plan fuh git eeben wid Buh Elephunt fuh de big damage wuh him bin
done ter um an eh fambly.

Eh quaintun wid de place way Buh Elephunt blan leddown fuh tek eh res;
so eh watch um, an wen eh done gone der bed, Buh Rabbit, him slip back
an eh call eh wife, and dem gedder dry leaf an dead grass, an dem tote
um ter de spot way Buh Elephunt duh sleep, an dem full all two Buh
Elephunt yez long de leaf an grass. Den dem trike fire an clap um ter
de dry grass an leaf wuh dem bin pit een Buh Elephunt yez. Eh blaze up.
Buh Elephunt wake. Eh couldnt mek out wuh happne. De ting biggin fuh
bun um bad. Eh holler fuh somebody fuh help um. Eh roll ober an try fuh
out de fire een eh yez. Eh tek eh trunk an try fuh lick um out, but
befo de fire done out, eh bun de hinge er all two eh yez, so eh couldnt
liff um up no mo.

Dat de way Buh Rabbit tek eh rewenge on Buh Elephunt case eh mash eh
chillun, an dat de reason huccum Buh Elephunt hab flop yez tel ter-day.




                                XXXVIII.

                  BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN BUH POSSUM.

Buh Rabbit an Buh Wolf gone long de ribber bank fuh hunt Cooter agg.
Dem Cooter blan come outer de water wen de tide high, an dig hole een
de san, an lay dem agg, an kibber dem ober so crow an ting cant fine
um. Buh Rabbit an Buh Wolf come topper nough er Cooter nes, an dem
gedder de agg an share um equel. Dem pit um een bag, an es dem gin
gwine home, de agg so fresh an sweet, Buh Rabbit slip eh han een eh bag
an onbeknowinst ter Buh Wolf eh suck all de agg wuh bin fall ter him
share befo dem retch de fork er de road way dem gwine part compny.

Buh Wolf tote all him agg home, an gen um ter him wife. Eh yent bin een
eh house berry long wen up come Buh Rabbit duh puff an der blow. Soon
es eh ketch eh bref eh say: “Buh Wolf, wuh you bin do long dem Cooter
agg? Enty you fine out say dem spile? Me bin gib some er mine ter me
wife, an eh gen um cramp colic right off. Me run all de way fuh tell
you, so you kin sabe you fambly from sick.”

Buh Wolf nebber spicion say Buh Rabbit bin er tell um lie, an eh tenk
um berry much, an eh gone git de Cooter agg an trow um way. Buh Rabbit
notus way Buh Wolf bin trow de agg; an soon es Buh Wolf gone back een
him house, Buh Rabbit gedder dem up an tote um off een de bush, an
seddown an biggin fuh eat dem dist es saterfy es kin be.

Eh so happne say Buh Wolf come pon topper Buh Rabbit duh eat dem Cooter
agg, an eh see right off how Buh Rabbit done fool um. Eh git rale mad,
an eh mek eh jump fuh graff Buh Rabbit, but Buh Rabbit too quick fur
um, and eh tek ter eh heel. Buh Wolf push um so tight eh mek um quit de
groun an tek ter one pussimmon tree. Buh Rabbit so light eh gone out
on one leely limb way Buh Wolf couldnt foller um ner retch um. Wen Buh
Wolf fine out eh couldnt pit eh han pon topper Buh Rabbit fuh lick um,
eh call ter Buh Possum, wuh bin hab house close by, an eh ax um fuh run
day an watch Buh Rabbit tel him coulder git him ax fuh cut down de tree
an ketch Buh Rabbit. Buh Possum come, an eh seddown onder de tree duh
gard Buh Rabbit wile Buh Wolf gone fuh him ax.

Arter er wile Buh Rabbit say: “Buh Possum, dem yer pussimmon berry
sweet. Enty you want some?” Buh Possum, him mek answer: “Yes, me
Budder, me berry lub pussimmon, an me will glad fuh git some.” Den Buh
Rabbit tell um fuh step ter him house an fetch eh fanner fuh ketch de
pussimmon es eh pick um an drap um. Buh Possum so anxious fuh tase de
pussimmon eh clean furgit wuh Buh Wolf bin leff um fuh do, an so eh
gone ter him house fuh git eh fanner. Soon es eh back tun, Buh Rabbit
slip down de tree an lean fuh home. Wen Buh Wolf come wid eh ax, eh
fine Buh Rabbit an Buh Possum all two gone. Eh dat bex eh dunno wuffer
do. Een er leely wile yuh come Buh Possum duh tote he fanner. Buh Wolf
questun um, an wen eh fine out how Buh Rabbit done fool um an git way,
eh tun een an cuss Buh Possum an beat um. Eh tek a smart somebody fuh
head Buh Rabbit.




                                 XXXIX.

                BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE HOLLER TREE.

Arter Buh Rabbit bin fool Buh Wolf bout dem Cooter agg, an slip way
from Buh Possum, eh faid fuh meet Buh Wolf, an eh walk berry skittish
ebry time eh lef eh house. Buh Wolf bin on de keen look-out fuh um.
One day dem meet. Buh Wolf, him say: “Haw! Budder, me got you now. You
dodge me long time. Ebry man fuh isself.” Wid dat eh tek arter Buh
Rabbit. Buh Rabbit, him bin quaintun wid all de holler tree een de
wood, an wen Buh Wolf push um close, eh jump een one er dem. Buh Wolf
run up an eh say: “Me got you now. Come out an tek you lick, er me
gwine bun you up een dis tree.” Eh no bin know say narrur holler bin on
tarruh side er de tree, an dat Buh Rabbit done run clean tru an gone.
Wen eh couldnt yeddy nuttne from Buh Rabbit, Buh Wolf gedder fat pine
tick, an eh poke um een de holler an eh pit fire ter um. De fire roll,
an Buh Wolf feed um tell de tree bun down. Eh saterfy say Buh Rabbit
done bun up, an eh gone home, an eh mek brag ter him fambly say him bin
stroy Buh Rabbit.

Eh yent bin tree day arter dat wen lo an behole! Buh Wolf meet Buh
Rabbit duh seddown een de big road, dist es content es ef nuttne bin
happne, duh leek isself. Buh Wolf hail um an eh say: “Buh Rabbit, dat
duh you? Enty me bin bun you up tarruh day? Why you duh do duh leek
youself so happy an content?” Buh Rabbit, him mek answer: “Budder, dat
holler way you bin try fuh bun me een, gone ter de top er de tree, an
eh bin full er honey. De fire melt de honey, an eh run down an kibber
me all ober. Me yent done git um all offer me tel now. You come tase
me an see how sweet me yiz.” Buh Wolf so lub honey eh furgit eh spite
gainst Buh Rabbit, an eh come up an eh taste um, an eh fine out say
honey bin all ober Buh Rabbit. Den eh ax Buh Rabbit fuh show um one
holler way him kin git some honey. Buh Rabbit gree fuh do so ef Buh
Wolf would mek fren wid um. Dem shake ban, and den Buh Rabbit tell Buh
Wolf fuh foiler um. Eh tek um ter one tree wuh hab holler on one side,
but wuh shet up on tarruh side, an eh tell Buh Wolf say dat tree full
er honey, an eh mus git een an crawl up nigh de top es eh could go. Buh
Wolf trus Buh Rabbit, an eh gone een de holler. Soon es eh git een,
Buh Rabbit tek one lightwood knot an eh chink up de hole so Buh Wolf
couldnt come out. Den eh gedder some fat pine, an eh mek fire an eh bun
Buh Wolf up een de holler. While eh duh bun, Buh Wolf bague an pray Buh
Rabbit fuh leh um come out, but Buh Rabbit wouldnt yeddy um.

Buh Rabbit leetle fuh true an eh yent strong, but eh berry scheemy an
eh hab er bad heart.




                                   XL.

                      BUH RABBIT AN DE CUNJUR MAN.

Buh Rabbit greedy fuh hab mo sense den all de tarruh animel. Eh yent
lub fuh wuk, an eh try heap er scheme fuh git eh libbin outer edder
people by fool um.

One time eh gone ter one wise Cunjur Man fuh larne um him way, an fuh
git him knowledge, so him kin stonish tarruh people an mek dem bliebe
say him bin wise mo ner ebrybody. De Cunjur Man larne um heap er curous
ting. At las Buh Rabbit ax um fuh gen um eh full knowledge. De Cunjur
Man say: “Buh Rabbit, you hab sense nough aready.” Buh Rabbit keep on
bague um, an den de Cunjur Man mek answer: “Ef you kin ketch one big
rattlesnake an fetch um ter me live, me gwine do wuh you ax me fuh do.”

Buh Rabbit git ehself one long stick an eh gone der wood. Eh hunt tel
eh fine one whalin ob er rattlesnake duh quile up on one log. Eh pass
de time er day berry perlite wid um, an arterwards eh bet de snake
say him yent bin es long as de stick wuh him hab een him han. Buh
Rattlesnake laugh at um, an eh mek answer dat eh know eh yiz long mo
na de stick. Fuh settle de bet Buh Rattlesnake tretch ehself out ter
eh berry lenk on de log, an Buh Rabbit pit de pole long side er um fuh
medjuh um. Man sir! befo Buh Rattlesnake fine out, Buh Rabbit slip
one noose roun eh neck an fastne um tight ter de een der de pole. Buh
Rattlesnake twis ehself, an wrop ehself roun an roun de pole, an try
fuh git eh head loose, but all eh twis an tun yent do um no good. An so
Buh Rabbit ketch um, an cahr um ter de Cunjur Man.

De Cunjur Man rale suprise, an eh say: “Buh Rabbit, me always bin yeddy
say you bin hab heap er sense, but now me know dat you got um. Ef you
kin fool Rattlesnake, you hab all de sense you want.” Wen Buh Rabbit
keep on bague de Cunjur Man fuh gie um mo sense, de Cunjur Man answer:
“You go fetch me er swarm er Yaller Jacket, an wen you bring um ter me,
me prommus you teh gie you all de sense you want.”

Ebrybody know say Yaller Jacket wus den warse, an bee, an hornet. Eh
sting so bad, an eh berry lub fuh drap topper ebryting wuh come close
eh nes, an dout gie um any warnin. So wuh Buh Rabbit do? Eh gone an eh
git one big calabash, an eh crape um out clean, an eh cut one hole een
um, an eh pit honey een um, an eh tie um on de een er one long pole.
Den eh hunt tel eh fine er Yaller Jacket nes, an eh set de calabash
close by um dout worry de Yaller Jacket, an eh leff um day, an eh tan
off an watch um. Bimeby de Yaller Jacket scent de honey, an dem come
out de nes an gone een de calabash fuh eat de honey. Wen de calabash
full er Yaller Jacket, Buh Rabbit slip up an stop de hole, an cahr um
ter de Cunjur Man. De Cunjur Man mek er great miration ober wuh Buh
Rabbit bin done, an eh say: “Buh Rabbit, you is suttenly de smartest
ob all de animel, an you sense shill git mo an mo ebry day. Mo na dat,
me gwine pit white spot on you forrud, so ebrybody kin see you hab de
bes sense een you head.” An dat de way Buh Rabbit come fuh hab er leely
tuff er white hair between eh yez.




                                  XLI.

                  BUH RABBIT, BUH FOX, AN DE FISHERMAN.

Buh Rabbit es er soon man. You haffer git up befo day fuh head um.
Wayebber you fine um, eh yez cock up fuh yeddy ebryting wuh duh gwine
on. Eh nose duh twis from side ter side fuh ketch all de scent duh
float een de element, an wen eh walk bout eh hop so light you tink
der sperit. Eh lub fuh lib close big road an settlement, way him kin
quaintun wid all wuh happne, an pick eh chance fuh mek eh libbin easy.

One time er Ole Man hab er fish trap wuh mek wid bode. Eh hab er gate.
Wen de tide duh come een de creek, de gate open an leh de fish een; an
wen de tide duh gwine back der ribber, de gate shet an stop all de fish
wuh day een de creek. Ebry low tide de Ole Man tek eh leely waggin an
wisit eh trap, an collec de fish an pit um een eh waggin an cahr um
home fuh him an eh fambly fuh eat.

Buh Rabbit watch de Ole Man es eh pass day arter day long de big road,
an eh hanker arter de fish, but eh yent know rightly how fuh git some.
Arter er wile eh fix dis plan. De nex time eh see de Ole Man duh comin
long de road wid eh waggin an fish, eh leddown dist on de adge er de
road, an eh pant same luk eh bin gwine fuh dead. Es de ole man bin er
pass long eh notus um, an eh stop, an eh gone ter um an eh ax um wuh
ail um. Buh Rabbit mek answer een er woice so leely you cacely kin
yeddy um, an tell um say eh berry sick; dat eh bin gwine home wen eh
back an eh leg gie out, an eh couldnt trabble no furder. Den eh bague
de Ole Man fuh tek um up een eh waggin an cahr um long de big road tel
eh come ter de place way him fuh tun off fuh gwine ter him house. De
Ole Man gree fuh do so, an eh liff Buh Rabbit up, an eh pit um een eh
waggin long side de pile er fish. Buh Rabbit leddown luk eh dead. De
Ole Man back tun ter Buh Rabbit. Een er leely while Buh Rabbit biggin
fuh slip fish outer de waggin, an trow um, onbeknowinst ter de Ole Man,
een de bush wuh bin er grow long side er de road. Wen dem mose git ter
de place way de Ole Man gwine tun out de big road, Buh Rabbit hop outer
de waggin dout de Ole Man shum, an run back an gedder all de fish wuh
him bin tief.

Es de Ole Man retch eh big gate, eh look behine fuh see how Buh Rabbit
duh mek out; an de fus ting eh know Buh Rabbit yent day een de waggin,
an heap er him fish done missin. Den de Ole Man fine out say Buh Rabbit
bin fool um an tief eh fish. De Ole Man berry bex, an eh dribe home an
tell eh wife bout de ting.

Arter Buh Rabbit done gedder de fish wuh eh bin tief outer de Ole Man
waggin, eh pit um on tring, an eh start fuh tote um ter him house. Buh
Fox meet um, an eh quire way eh git all dem fish. Buh Rabbit up an tell
um. Buh Fox say him want git some too. Den Buh Rabbit mek um senserble
wen de Ole Man gwine come long de road, an eh show um good place fuh
him fuh wuk eh plan fuh do dist es him bin do.

De nex day Buh Fox tek eh stan sider de big road an wait fuh de Ole Man
an eh waggin. Befo long yuh eh come. Buh Fox trow isself in de groun,
an roll ober, an moan berry pitiful. De Ole Man shum, an eh light offer
eh waggin an run up ter um wid eh big whip een eh han. Buh Fox bin tink
say de Ole Man gwine pity um, an tek um een eh waggin same luk eh done
Buh Rabbit. Steader dat, an befo eh fine out, de Ole Man knock um een
de head wid de butt er eh whip an stunted um. Den eh beat um ter det,
an eh tek um up an eh trow um een eh waggin, an eh dribe home. Wen eh
git day eh call eh wife an eh show um de tief wuh bin tek eh fish. De
Ole Man yent bin know de diffunce tween Buh Rabbit an Buh Fox. Eh tink
all two bin de same animel.

Buh Rabbit, him no care so eh sabe isself. Him bin know say Buh Fox
gwine ketch de debble wen de Ole Man come pon topper um.




                                  XLII.

                  BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE YEARLIN.

Buh Rabbit an Buh Wolf come inter cohoot fuh kill cow. Dem gone een de
paster an pick out one fat yearlin, an run um down, an ketch um, an cut
eh troat. Den dem skin um an share de meat. Buh Wolf claim de bigges
part, case him hab de bigges fambly. Eh strong mo ner Buh Rabbit, an
so Buh Rabbit yent hab de power fuh mek um do jestice. But ef Buh Wolf
hab de strenk, Buh Rabbit hab de bes sense. So wuh Buh Rabbit do? Eh
tek some salt outer him bag, an eh buil fire, an eh brile some er de
yearlin meat on de coals, an eh eat um right befo Buh Wolf. Soon es eh
done eat um, eh cry out an eh say eh hab pain er belly, an eh double
ehself all up, an eh roll eh yeye, an eh waller all long de groun,
an eh mek all sorter curous motion an noise. Buh Wolf skaid, an eh
conclude say de meat yent good. Eh tink say eh pizen Buh Rabbit, an dem
gree fuh leff um.

Buh Wolf wait tel Buh Rabbit sorter come teh, an den eh help um ter him
house an tell um goodbye.

Wen sun down an eh biggin fuh dark, Buh Rabbit gedder him fambly, and
dem gone an git de yearlin meat, an dem cahr um home an dem eat um.
Nuttne bin ail de meat. Eh bin soun an sweet, an Buh Rabbit do dis fuh
fool Buh Wolf an git him share too.




                                 XLIII.

               BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, DE DOG, AN DE GOOSE.

Arter dat time wen Buh Rabbit bin play dat trick on Buh Wolf an ride
um up ter de Gal house wuh dem all two bin er cote, Buh Wolf berry bex
long Buh Rabbit, an eh wan ketch um fuh gie um good lickin. Buh Rabbit,
him so smate eh keep outer Buh Wolf way so eh couldnt come pon topper
um. Buh Wolf hire one dog fuh help um ketch Buh Rabbit. One day de Dog
meet Buh Rabbit der wood, an dout say one wud ter um, eh lean arter um
fuh ketch um. Buh Rabbit run, but de Dog push um so tight Buh Rabbit,
fuh sabe ehself, jump een one holler oak tree. De hole bin too leely
fuh de Dog fuh foller um, an so Buh Rabbit mek ehself saterfy say eh
done git way. Bimeby eh yeddy de Dog call one goose, an tell um fuh
watch de holler tel him kin git some fire an moss fuh smoke Buh Rabbit
outer de tree. Wen de Dog gone fuh gedder de moss an git de fire, Buh
Rabbit call ter de Goose an ax um: “How you duh watch me wen you no see
me?” Wid dat de Goose poke eh long head een de holler fuh look fuh
Buh Rabbit. Es eh do dat, Buh Rabbit trow rotten wood een eh yeye. Eh
bline de Goose, an eh draw eh head out, an wile eh duh fight fuh git de
rotten wood outer eh yeye Buh Rabbit slip out an gone. Wen de Dog come
back, eh stuff de moss een de holler, an eh pit fire ter um, an eh mek
er hebby smoke; but eh cant see ner yeddy nuttne bout Buh Rabbit. Den
eh biggin fuh spicion say Buh Rabbit might er git out, an eh tackle de
Goose bout um. Eh notus de Goose yeye red an eh duh run water. De Goose
tell um how Buh Rabbit bin trow rotten wood een eh yeye wen eh bin er
peep up de holler. Den de Dog know fuh sutten say Buh Rabbit bin wuk
dat plan fuh git way, an dat eh done gone fuh true. Eh so bex eh cuss
de Goose fuh er fool, an eh tun on um fuh stroy um. De Goose holler, an
manage fuh sail way een de element, but eh leff eh fedder een de Dog
mouf.




                                  XLIV.

                         BUH SQUIRLE AN BUH FOX.

Buh Squirle bin berry busy duh gedder hickry not on de groun fuh pit
way fuh feed ehself an eh fambly duh winter time. Buh Fox bin er watch
um, an befo Buh Squirle shum, eh slip up an eh graff um. Buh Squirle,
eh dat skaid eh trimble all ober, an eh bague Buh Fox fuh lem go. Buh
Fox tell um say eh bin er try fuh ketch um long time, but eh hab sich
sharp yeye, an keen yez, an spry leg, eh manage fuh dodge um; an now
wen eh got um at las, eh mean fuh kill um an eat um. Wen Buh Squirle
fine out dat Buh Fox yent bin gwine pity um an tun um loose, but dat eh
fix fuh kill um an eat um, Buh Squirle say teh Buh Fox: “Enty you know
say nobody oughter eat eh bittle befo eh say grace ober um?” Buh Fox
him mek answer: “Dat so;” an wid dat eh pit Buh Squirle een front er
um, an eh fall on eh knee, an eh kibber eh yeye wid eh han, an eh tun
een fuh say grace.

Wile Buh Fox bin er do dis, Buh Squirle manage fuh slip way; an wen Buh
Fox open eh yeye, eh see Buh Squirle duh run up de tree way him couldnt
tetch um.

Buh Fox fine eh couldnt help ehself, an eh call arter Buh Squirle an eh
say: “Nummine, Boy, you done git way now, but de nex time me clap dis
han topper you, me gwine eat you fus an say grace arterward.”

Bes plan fuh er man fuh mek sho er eh bittle befo eh say tenky fuh um.




                                  XLV.

                BUH RABBIT, BUH WOLF, AN DE BUCKRA MAN.

Er Buckra man bin hab er gang er sheep. Ebry now an den eh miss one. Eh
sarche eh fiel, an eh see Buh Wolf track day, an eh mek up eh mine say
him bin er de one wuh duh tief eh sheep. Eh fix heaper plan fuh ketch
um, but eh fail. At lenk eh call een Buh Rabbit, case eh hab summuch
sense, fuh help um. Buh Rabbit, him gree fuh do so ef de Buckra man
would len um one horse, an would prommus no fuh tell Buh Wolf nuttne
bout de ting.

De Buckra man gen um de prommus an len um de horse. Buh Rabbit ride de
horse ter him house, an eh sen wud ter Buh Wolf say him dist bin buy er
fine ridin horse, an him want um fuh come an tek er ride long um. Buh
Wolf, him come, an wen eh look topper de horse eh tell Buh Rabbit him
would lub fuh ride um, but dat him faid say de horse gwine fling um.
Buh Rabbit mek answer say him mussnt faid; dat him gwine pit saddle on
de horse, an wen Buh Wolf git een um eh gwine tie eh leg so him cant
fall off; an, mo ner dat, him gwine git up behine fuh hole um on.
Arter dat Buh Wolf seem saterfy.

Buh Rabbit trow de saddle on de horse an gelt um tight. Den Buh Wolf
climb up an tek eh seat. Buh Rabbit tek string, an eh tie Buh Wolf leg
fas ter de stirrup. Now eh say: “Me gwine git up behine fuh hole you
on.” Steader dat, wen Buh Wolf yent bin er notus, eh step back, an eh
tek er bunch er cock-spur an eh lick um onder de horse tail. De ting
hot de animel so bad, eh jump, an eh pitch, an eh kick up. Buh Wolf
grab de bridle an juk de horse mouf, an dat mek um rare up. Buh Wolf
git rale skaid, an eh holler fuh Buh Rabbit fuh tek um off. Buh Rabbit
tell um fuh hole on tel him kin onloose de saddle. All dis time de
horse bin er cut sich caper Buh Wolf couldnt manage um, an so eh drap
de bridle an heng on ter eh mange fuh keep from fall off. Wen de horse
fine say eh head loose, eh mek fuh home; an befo Buh Wolf fine out eh
run tru de big gate an roun de house ter de stable. De Buckra man bin
er set een eh piazza, an eh see wen de horse come up wid Buh Wolf der
heng topper eh neck. Eh run ter de stable, an eh leh de horse an Buh
Wolf een. Den eh call eh driber, an dem ontie Buh Wolf an fastne um
ter one tree. Arter dem bin gen um bout one hundud lash, Buh Rabbit run
up an bague de Buckra man fuh tun Buh Wolf loose. Eh did tun um loose.
Buh Wolf nebber did fine out say Buh Rabbit bin fix dis plan fuh pit um
een de Buckra man han, an eh tell Buh Rabbit heap er tenky fuh de faber
wuh him bin done ter um.

Ebry time you yeddy bout Buh Rabbit you fine um duh come out head.




                                  XLVI.

                     BUH RABBIT AN BUH WOLF FUNERAL.

Buh Rabbit fool Buh Wolf so many time, an een sich diffrunt fashion,
dat eh outdone wid um. Ebry time eh try fuh ketch um fuh lick um, Buh
Rabbit somehow er narruh slip tru eh han an git way. Buh Wolf, him hire
edder people fuh wuk plan fuh git de better er Buh Rabbit an pit um
een eh power, but, bless you soul! dem fail too, an Buh Rabbit, him go
clear. De ting mose worry Buh Wolf life outer um. Eh fret so bout um
tel eh biggin fuh tun rale po.

At lenk Buh Wolf gie out say him berry sick. Leely wile arter dat,
de news come dat Buh Wolf dead. Eh wife eenwite all eh fren ter de
funeral. Buh Wolf mek sho say eh gwine ketch Buh Rabbit now.

Buh Bear, him bin der de passon. Dog come. Roccoon come. Squirle come.
Possum come. Cow come. Alligatur an Cooter, dem come. Deer, him bin
day too. Buh Wolf, him bin er lay out on er bench een de middle er him
house, kibber ober wid er wite clorte, an eh wife an eh chillun duh tan
roun um duh cry. Buh Owl, him fetch er spade fuh dig de grabe, an bud
bin day too fuh sing er hyme.

Wen dem all bin gedder, Buh Rabbit enter dist es careful, an tek eh
stan jes by de do. Dem wait leely wile fuh Buh Fox, but him sen wud
say him wife hab feber an him couldnt leff um. Den Buh Bear, him tek
eh book an eh read um, an eh preach er sarmint. Arter dat de Mockinbud
raise er chune, an dem all sing.

All dis time Buh Wolf bin er leddown, tretch out ter eh full lenk, and
stiff lucker eh bin dead fuh true. Eh hole eh bref so tight, nobody
could yeddy um breave. Wen de preachin an de singin done ober, dem
all gone up fuh tek dem las look at Buh Wolf befo dem tote um out fuh
bury um. Dem raise up de clorte wuh bin ober eh face, an eh look dist
es natrul; an dem tell um goodbye one by one. Buh Rabbit him walk up
las, an eh yent gone berry close needer. Buh Rabbit always tote eh
good sense bout um, an eh nebber will run no resk. Es eh come fuh look
topper Buh Wolf, Buh Wolf bin spec say eh woulder tan so close dat eh
coulder graff um. But wen eh fine Buh Rabbit sorter skittish, an eh
duh ease ehself off, eh tek de chance, an, all ober sutten, eh trow
ehself offer de bench an eh mek arter Buh Rabbit. Buh Rabbit, him bin
hab eh yeye on Buh Wolf all de time, an befo Buh Wolf could mek eh way
tru de crowd an come up long um, Buh Rabbit slip out de back do an trow
ehself een de brier patch, way Buh Wolf couldnt foller um. De people
all stonish, an wen dem fine out de trute er de ting, dem berry bex;
an, befo dem leff, dem bemean Buh Wolf sich er fashion eh bin shame fuh
show ehself een de settlement fuh many er days. Dat bin er dutty trick
wuh Buh Wolf play on eh fren and on Buh Rabbit, but Buh Rabbit, him
outdo um.




                                 XLVII.

                       DE NEW NIGGER AN EH MOSSA.

Er New Nigger notus say eh Mossa heap er time duh seddown wid eh foot
cross, yent duh say nuttne an yent duh do nuttne, wen him haffer wuk
all de time. One day eh ax eh Mossa huccum dat. De Buckra man answer:
“Wen you see me duh seddown, an you tink me duh lazy, same time me duh
wuk long me head, an duh mek plan, an study pon ting.”

Soon arter dat de Buckra man come pon topper de New Nigger een de fiel.
De sun hot. Eh bin drap eh hoe, an bin er seddown on de cotton bed duh
res ehself. De Buckra man git bex case de Nigger bin er glec eh wuk, an
eh say ter um: “Huccum you stop de wuk wuh me bin gen you fuh do? Wuh
mek you duh lazy disher fashion?” Den de New Nigger, him mek answer:
“Mossa, me duh wuk long me head.” Wen de Buckra man quire wuh kind er
head wuk him duh do, de New Nigger say: “Mossa, ef you see tree pigeon
duh set on dat tree limb, an you shoot an kill one er dem, how many
gwine leff?” Eh Mossa reply: “Any fool kin tell dat. Ob scource two
gwine leff.” De New Nigger, him mek answer: “No, Mossa, you miss. Ef
you shoot an kill one er dem pigeon, de edder two boun fuh fly way, an
none gwine leff.”

De Buckra man bleege fuh laugh, an eh yent do nuttne ter de New Nigger
case eh glec eh wuk.




                                 XLVIII.

                      BUH RABBIT AN DE KING DARTER.

Dere was er King wuh bin hab er pooty Darter, an heap er people bin er
cote um. De gal couldnt mek up eh mine which one fuh tek, an so eh ax
eh farruh fuh help um pick. Den eh farruh, wuh bin de King, gen out wud
say de one wuh kin fetch ter um de Alligatur yeye teet, an water from
de Deer yeye, shill hab eh Darter.

All dem wuh bin er cote de gal fix plan fuh git dem ting, but dem fail.
Ebry body bin faid Alligatur, an nobody could outrun Buh Deer. Buh
Rabbit, him bin berry lub de gal, an him hanker arter marry um, so eh
study bout de ting an mek eh scheme. Eh tek eh fiddle an eh gone ter
de ribber bank, an eh play er funny chune, an eh sing er funny song.
Buh Alligatur yeddy um; an bimeby eh crawl outer de mash grass, an
eh leddown close by Buh Rabbit, so him kin ketch all wuh Buh Rabbit
der play an der sing. Buh Rabbit do eh bes, an de ting tickle Buh
Alligatur so bad eh laugh berry harty. Buh Rabbit play an sing, an pick
eh chance, an wen Buh Alligatur duh shet eh yeye an open eh mout fuh
laugh, eh tek eh fiddle bow an, all ob er sutten, eh knock one er Buh
Alligatur yeye teet outer eh head. Befo eh fine out, Buh Rabbit done
pick up de teet an gone.

Den Buh Rabbit notus way Buh Deer blan ramble der wood, an eh dig er
deep hole, an eh kibber um ober complete long dut, an pine straw, an
oak leaf. Eh hide een de bush oneside duh watch. Bimeby Buh Deer, him
come long duh eat grass, an befo eh fine out, de groun gie way onder eh
foot, an eh drap bottom er de hole. Buh Deer dat skaid eh dunno wuffer
do. Eh scuffle. Eh holler, but eh couldnt git out. Buh Rabbit run day,
an eh tell um say dog bin on eh track, an dat dem mose git day. Wid dat
Buh Deer gib up, an biggin fuh cry. Den Buh Rabbit, him slip een de
hole wid er leely calabash, an eh ketch de water duh run down from Buh
Deer yeye. Arter dat eh gone home, an eh tek de Alligatur yeye teet, an
de calabash wuh hab de Deer yeye water een um, an eh light out fuh de
King house.

Wen him show de King wuh him bring, de King gree say Buh Rabbit head er
all dem wuh bin er cote him Darter, an eh gen um de gal, an dem bin hab
er hebby weddin.




                                  XLIX.

                             DE SINGLE BALL.

Er Buckra man bin berry lub fuh hunt deer. Eh nussen fuh brag too. Eh
hab er Serbant wuh always gone wid um der wood fuh dribe de deer. Him
bin berry fond er eh Mossa, an eh ready any time fuh schway ter de tale
wuh him tell bout how much deer dem kill, an way dem shoot um. One time
dis Buckra man bin tell eh fren say him shoot er deer long er rifle,
an wen eh gone fuh zamine um, eh fine say de ball shoot off eh hine
foot an hit um een eh yez. Him fren couldnt see how dat happne, an dem
yent bin want fuh bleeve de tale. Den de hunter man call pon topper him
Serbant fuh proobe wuh him bin say. De Serbant speak de wud same luk
him Mossa bin talk um. Den de gentlemans ax um how de same ball could
er hit de deer een eh hine foot an een eh yez same time. De Nigger
cratch eh head, an den eh mek answer: “Gentlemans, me spec wen Mossa
fire pon topper um, de deer mus be bin er bresh fly offer eh yez wid eh
hine foot.” Dat sorter saterfy de gentlemans, an sabe de Buckra man wud.

Arter de gentlemans done gone, de Serbant call eh Mossa one side an eh
say: “Mossa, me willin fuh back anyting you say bout hunt an kill deer,
but lemme bague you nex time you tell bout how you shoot um, you pit de
hole closer. Dis time you mek um so fur apart, me hab big trouble fur
git um togerruh.”




                                   L.

                       BUH ROCCOON AN BUH POSSUM.

Buh Roccoon ax Buh Possum wuh mek, wen de dog tackle um, eh double up
ehself, an kibber eh yeye wid eh han, an wunt fight lucker man an lick
de dog off. Buh Possum grin eh teet same lucker fool, an eh say, wen de
dog come pon topper um, dem tickle him rib so bad long dem mout dat him
bleege ter laugh; an so him furgit fuh fight.

Coward man hab all kind er lie fuh tell fuh scuse ehself.




                                   LI.

                    BUH WOLF, BUH RABBIT, AN DE RAIN.

Buh Wolf bin er set een de do er him house duh play eh fiddle. Lord
er massy! how dat animel did mek dat fiddle talk! Buh Wolf yeye shet
tight, an eh dis bin er rock from side ter side, an draw eh bow teh eh
berry lenk, en der pat de time wid eh foot. Er hebby shower er rain
come on. Buh Rabbit, him bin een de big road not fur from Buh Wolf
house. Buh Rabbit yent lub rain, an eh try fuh shelter ehself onder er
oak tree wuh kibber wid long moss. De rain lick um een eh yez, an eh
leff fuh hunt better place. Es eh pass by Buh Wolf house, eh notus Buh
Wolf duh set een de do duh play eh fiddle. Buh Wolf so tek up wid eh
play dat eh shet eh yeye an yent duh watch wuh gwine on roun um. So Buh
Rabbit mek up eh mine fuh slip een de do pass Buh Wolf, an set een him
house tel de rain done ober. Buh Rabbit foot so sofe nobody kin yeddy
um wen eh walk. Him no know, but Buh Wolf ketch sight er um outer de
corner ob him yeye wen Buh Rabbit hop een de do an run back side er de
room. Eh sed down day an mek ehself saterfy, an duh wait topper de
rain. Buh Wolf him yent leh Buh Rabbit know say him shum, but eh biggin
fuh tun eh chune, an eh play an eh sing: “Tenk God, rain done sen meat
een me house. Tenk God, rain done sen meat een me house.” Buh Rabbit
yeddy; an eh spicion say Buh Wolf smell um, an fine out say him bin een
eh house. Buh Rabbit hair rise, an eh want fuh git out, but eh faid fuh
slip back trough de do way Buh Wolf bin er sed down. Buh Rabbit berry
oneasy een eh mine, an eh duh consider plan fuh mek eh scape.

Buh Wolf house buil on de groun senker hog pen. Eh mek wid pole. Him
bin tink say him got Buh Rabbit safe, an so eh keep on play eh fiddle
an sing: “Tenk God, rain done sen meat een me house. Tenk God, rain
done sen meat een me house.” Wile Buh Wolf duh mek ehself saterfy say
him hab Buh Rabbit an gwine eat um soon es de rain done ober, Buh
Rabbit duh grabble, grabble, grabble onder de bottom er de pole, tel eh
mek hole big nough, an den eh slip out, onbeknowinst teh Buh Wolf, an
hop roun teh de front do, an eh holler teh Buh Wolf: “You duh sing an
der play, ‘Tenk God, rain done sen meat een you house,’ but you yent
eat um yet, an you yent gwine eat um.” Wid dat eh leff right befo Buh
Wolf face. Buh Wolf rale disappint. Eh loss eh dinner. Eh gone an eh
heng up eh fiddle, an eh say teh ehself: “Me tought sho me bin hab um,
but Rabbit beat my time.”




                                  LII.

                 BUH ALLIGATUH, BUH RABBIT, AN BUH WOLF.

Buh Rabbit, him bin er tief Buh Alligatuh agg. Buh Alligatuh ketch um
topper eh nes. Eh graff um an eh pit um een one crocus bag, an eh tie
up de een er de bag tight, an eh heng um on one tree lim, an eh gone
home fuh git eh lash fuh lick Buh Rabbit. Buh Rabbit dat skaid eh yeye
big moner saucer. Eh duh trimble een de bag, an duh peep trough de
crack een de crocus fuh notus wuh gwine happne.

Bimeby eh see Buh Wolf duh ramble dat way. Soon es Buh Wolf come anigh
um, Buh Rabbit biggin fuh sing say him gwine teh Hebben, way him will
hab nuttne fuh do cept joy ehself; way him will hab no corn fuh grine,
no tetter fuh dig, no cotton fuh pick, no rice fuh hoe, an no chillun
fuh mine. Buh Rabbit mek tense luk him so happy case de Lord dist er
commin fuh tek um right up eenter de element.

Buh Wolf stop. Eh listne teh Buh Rabbit. Eh yeddy close, an den eh say:
“Buh Rabbit, enty dat duh you woice?” Buh Rabbit, him mek answer: “Yes,
Budder, dis duh me.” Den Buh Wolf ax um wuh eh duh do een dat crocus
bag. Buh Rabbit tell um say him dist fix ehself dat er way so de Lord
kin fine um handy fuh tek um right up eenter Hebben; an den eh say:
“Good-bye, Buh Wolf, I leff all me trial behine; you no gwine see me no
mo; me gwine leff right off fuh Hebben.” Buh Wolf now, him yent hab no
better sense den fuh bleebe wuh Buh Rabbit duh talk; an eh bague Buh
Rabbit fuh leh him jine um an go long um. Buh Rabbit, him mek answer:
“Me Budder, me glad fuh bleege you, but de good Lord tell me say only
one at er time kin enter Hebben. Two an two cant go day.” Buh Wolf
bague. Eh bague. At lenk Buh Rabbit mek tense say eh gie way caze Buh
Wolf bague um so bad, an eh say: “Well, Budder, you seem so anxious me
gwine leh you tek me chance dis time, an me will haffer wait topper de
Lord tel narruh tun.”

Wid dat eh tell Buh Wolf fuh loose de bag offer de tree lim, an ontie
um. Arter Buh Wolf done do dis, Buh Rabbit git out, an Buh Wolf tek
eh place een de bag. Buh Rabbit tie up de mout er de bag berry tight,
an heng um gen on de tree lim. Buh Wolf, lucker fool, duh set eenside
duh spec fuh rise ter Hebben. Buh Rabbit now, eh so glad eh free, eh
hop off one side an hide ehself een one gall-berry ticket, way nobody
kin shum, an cock eh yez fuh notus wuh gwine happne. Eh know say big
trouble gwine come topper Buh Wolf.

Eh yent bin berry long wen yuh come Buh Alligatuh duh tote er keen
black lash. Eh gone right up ter de bag, an eh gen um er nasty cut.
Den eh haul back an eh gen de bag anurrer whaling ub er lick. Eh no
bin know say Buh Rabbit bin git out, an dat Buh Wolf bin eenside. Buh
Wolf couldnt mek out wuh bin gwine on. De lick hot um so bad eh holler
out: “Wudder dat? Who duh dat? Wuh hoona duh do long me? Lemme lone.”
Buh Alligatuh so bex eh yent yeddy say eh bin Buh Wolf woice, an eh
keep duh pile on de lick tell eh tare de crocus an cut de bag down. Buh
Wolf all lick up so eh casely kin walk. Wen eh scuffle outer de bag,
Buh Alligatuh fine out fuh de fus time say eh binner whale up Buh Wolf,
steader Buh Rabbit wuh bin tief eh agg. Den Buh Alligatuh ax Buh Wolf
pardon, an mek um tell um huccum Buh Rabbit bin fool um an git um fuh
tek eh place een de bag. Buh Alligatuh bex an sorry all two: eh bex
caze Buh Rabbit play dat trick an git way; eh sorry caze Buh Wolf beat
up so sewere. All dis time Buh Rabbit duh squat een de bush, way eh kin
see an yeddy ebry ting, duh half kill ehself wid laugh.

All de sorry wuh Buh Alligatuh bin sorry fuh Buh Wolf yent bin done
um no good. Eh bin bruise up so bad eh haffer tek eh bed fuh mona two
week, an all dat time Buh Wolf fambly mose dead long hongry.

Buh Alligatuh an Buh Wolf all two mek plan fuh ketch Buh Rabbit, but
dem nebber did obertek um. No matter wuh de trouble, Buh Rabbit always
hab sense nough fuh clear ehself. Eh yent hab dem long yez an big yeye
fuh nuttne.




                                  LIII.

                           DE DYIN BULL-FROG.

One time er ole Bull-Frog bin berry sick an spectin fuh dead. All eh
fren een de pon collec roun um an eh fambly, fuh nuss um an tek dem
las look at um. Dat ole Frog bin hab er noung wife an heap er leely
chillun. Eh berry trouble een eh breas bout who gwine mine eh fambly
arter eh gone. Wen eh woice biggin fuh fail um, an dist befo eh dead,
eh say: “Me fren, who gwine tek me wife wen de breaf leff dis yer
body?” Eh fren all holler out at de top er dem woice: “Me me. Me me. Me
me.” Den eh quire: “Who er you gwine mine me leely chillun?” Fuh some
time eh yent yeddy no answer; an den de answer come back ter um one by
one from all ober de pon, an een er deep woice: “Yent der me. Yent der
me. Yent der me.”

Heap er people willin’ fuh notus er pooty noung widder, wen dem no want
bodder long narruh man chillun.




                                  LIV.

                  BUH RABBIT, BUH PATTRIDGE, AN DE COW.

Buh Rabbit, him berry greedy, an him lub fuh tell lie. Him an Buh
Pattridge mek greement fuh kill Cow. Buh Pattridge ax Buh Rabbit: “Way
we gwine butcher um?” Buh Rabbit say: “Less we dribe um close up ter my
house befo we kill um.” Dem done dat, an arter dem kill an skin de Cow,
dem cut um up fuh share um. Den Buh Rabbit tell Buh Pattridge: “You
tek one er de fore-quarter, caze you know you leetle an cant tote much
one time, an me radder you tek de fore-quarter anyhow, caze eh nex de
heart, an eh mo sweeter den de res er de meat.” So Buh Pattridge tek
one er de fore-quarter an leff fuh him house.

Soon es Buh Pattridge gone duh tote eh meat home, Buh Rabbit tun een
an tote all de res er de Cow ter him house, an pit um een eh room, an
lock de do. Den eh stan outside duh watch fuh see wen Buh Pattridge
would er come back fuh mo meat, so dem all two could er meet same time
at de place way dem bin butcher de Cow. Buh Rabbit leh Buh Pattridge
git er leely way ahead er um es dem gwine back ter de spot way de Cow
bin kill, an wen eh come up eh say: “Hi! Buh Pattridge, way all de
meat gone?” Buh Pattridge, him mek answer: “Me dis bin gwine ax you wuh
you bin do wid all de meat.” Buh Rabbit say: “How you kin ax me sich er
question, wen me bin see er whole gang er Pattridge dis gone from yuh?
Me sho say you an you fambly bin come back fuh tek anarruh tun long de
meat.” Buh Pattridge mek answer say him an eh fambly nebber bin nigh de
Cow sence eh fus leff um. Den Buh Rabbit schway say: “Ef eh yender you,
somebody else muster tief de Cow meat wen we all two bin gone;” an so
eh fool Buh Pattridge, an mek um bleebe say strange people muster slip
up an cahr off de meat, wen all de time him binner de tief, an hab um
lock up safe een him house.

You nebber kin trus Buh Rabbit. Eh all fuh ehself; an ef you listne ter
him tale, eh gwine cheat you ebry time, an tell de bigges lie dout wink
eh yeye.




                                   LV.

                   DE FIDDLER, BUH TIGER, AN BUH BEAR.

Long time ago dere bin er Ebo man wuh bin er great fiddler. Eh know
better den all dem tarruh people wuffer do long fiddle. Wen eh lean
back, an shet eh yeye, an draw eh bow fuh tru, nobody wuh yeddy kin
keep from shuffle eh foot. Ebry body roun de settlement blan gage um
fuh mek de music fuh dem fuh dance. One day eh bin gwine fuh keep eh
gagement fuh play at er party. Eh hab eh fiddle een er bag. Es eh bin
der walk tru er deep swamp, Buh Tiger an Buh Bear tek eh track an run
um. De man skaid wus den bad, but eh wunt drap eh fiddle. Eh clime one
tree an fix ehself een one crotch. Fus ting eh know, Buh Tiger biggin
fuh crawl up de tree fuh ketch um. De man holler and try fuh skaid de
beas, but eh wunt skaid. Eh keep on duh clime up. Den de man draw eh
fiddle an eh bow outer de bag, an biggin fuh play wid all eh strenk.
Buh Tiger bleege fuh stop teh listne ter um. Een er leely wile de chune
sweeten Buh Tiger so bad eh forgit ter foller de man, an eh tun roun an
come down de tree, an him an Buh Bear graff han, an all two set een
fuh dance. De faster de fiddler play, de faster dem dance. Dem gone
roun an roun, up an down, tel dem dead tired. At lenk dem all two so
outdone dem bleege fuh drap der groun an try fuh ketch dem win. Dem
cant dance er foot furder, an dem duh try fuh keep de time long dem
head.

Wen de Fiddler notus how complete dem outdone, eh slip down de tree,
an tek eh foot een eh han, an lean fuh de place way eh bin gwine. Buh
Tiger an Buh Bear yent hab strenk fuh foller um: an so eh music sabe um.




                                  LVI.

                      DE OLE KING AN DE NOUNG KING.

Er ole King yeddy say dem gwine pit er noung King een him place. De
ting worry um an mek um bex. Eh want fuh keep eh trone: so eh gen order
teh eh head man fuh mek him soldier kill all de ole people een de
nation, so de noung King shant hab no wise pusson fuh help um cahr on
de bidness er de kingdom. De soldier tek dem gun an dem club, an dem
massacree all de ageable people een de lan.

Den de ole King sen wud teh de noung King, wuh de people bin pick out
fuh rule ober dem, dat eh mus fetch um er fat hog, but eh musnt be
eider er sow-hog, neider er bo-hog, but eh mus be er fat hog.

Wen de noung King git de message, eh tun dis answer: “Tell de ole King
say me hab er fat barruh een de pen, an him mus come fur um; but eh
musnt come een de day, ner eh musnt come fuh um een de night.” De ole
King, wen eh yeddy dis message, mek up eh mine say de noung King mus
hab heap er sense, er else some wise man muster help um; an eh couldnt
see how dat kin be, case all de ole an de wise people een de nation
done kill. Eh no bin know dat wen de order gie fuh stroy all de ole
people een de kingdom, de noung King hide eh farruh een one holler
tree, an so eh mek eh scape from de soldier, an bin day fuh gen eh son
sense.

De noung King tun sich er smart answer, wid de help er eh farruh, dat
de ole King couldnt mek out wuh time fuh gone fuh de fat hog; an so
eh gib up, an de noung King, befo long, come an tun um out an tek eh
office.




                                  LVII.

                          BUH GOAT AN BUH WOLF.

Buh Goat berry faid tunder an lightnin an rain. One day big tunder
storm rise een de wes, an eh rain, an eh lightnin, an eh hail. Buh
Goat an eh wife bin er feed een de wood close by Buh Wolf house. Wen
de lightnin flash, an de tunder roll, an de rain po down, dem faid fuh
stay een de wood, an dem run teh Buh Wolf house, an dem bague um fuh
leh dem come een tel de storm done ober. Buh Wolf tell dem yes; an eh
tun Buh Goat an eh wife een de shedroom, an eh shet de do behine dem
an latch um. Buh Wolf shedroom yent bin hab bode flo. Eh mek topper
de neked dut. Arter Buh Wolf done shet up Buh Goat an eh wife, eh git
eh fiddle an eh biggin fuh play an sing: “Tenky goolly God, tunder
an lightnin done sen meat een me house. Tenky goolly God, tunder an
lightnin done sen meat een me house.” Buh Goat wife yeddy wuh Buh Wolf
bin er play an sing, an eh say teh eh husbun: “Enty you yeddy wuh
Buh Wolf duh play an duh sing: ‘Tenky goolly God, tunder an lightnin
done sen meat een me house’? Him gwine kill an eat we. Better leh we
grabble out an leff.” All dis time Buh Wolf wife bin er tell eh husbun:
“You better mine wuh you duh sing. You better keep you mout shet. Buh
Goat an eh wife gwine yeddy wuh you duh say.” Buh Wolf wouldnt listen
ter um. Eh wouldnt stop. Him say de rain duh fall so hebby Buh Goat an
him wife couldnt mek out wuh him duh sing. Wile dis bin er gwine on,
Buh Goat an eh wife busy duh grabble, grabble, grabble onder de sill er
de shedroom tel dem mek hole big nough fuh dem fuh crawl out, an den
dem slip out an gone.

Wen de rain stop, Buh Wolf heng up eh fiddle an gone git eh knife,
an pit eh pot on de fire, en sharpen eh knife on de pot rim. Den eh
onlatch de shedroom do an gone een fuh cut de troat er Buh Goat an eh
wife. De fus ting eh fine out, Buh Goat an eh wife done gone. Eh holler
back ter him wife an eh say: “Ole ooman! Buh Goat an eh wife git way.”
De ole ooman--wuh bin Buh Wolf wife--mek answer: “Enty me bin tell
you say Buh Goat an eh wife gwine yeddy? Duh you mek dat. Ef you bin
do es me bin tell you, an keep you big mout shet, you bin hab um all
two now.” Den Buh Wolf an eh wife biggin fuh quarrel an fight caze Buh
Wolf skaid Buh Goat an eh wife an lem git way. Buh Wolf wife lick eh
husbun tel eh holler, an eh tell um eh shant stay een de house bedout
eh fine um een meat. Buh Wolf bague berry hard, an eh prommus say ef eh
wife lem go him will hunt an fetch bittle right off. Den eh wife tun um
loose, an Buh Wolf gone fuh git meat.

Een de arternoon er de same day, wile Buh Wolf bin er hunt bittle,
eh meet up wid Buh Goat, an eh ax um: “Buh Goat, wuh sort er mean
trick dat wuh you bin do me dis mornin?” Buh Goat, him bex, an him
mek answer: “How you hab de face fuh talk long me an ax me sich er
question? Enty you bin fix fuh kill me an me wife dis mornin arter you
done gie we de freedom er you house? Enty we yeddy you sing an tenk de
Lord case tunder an lightnin sen meat een you house? You hab er bad
heart. You no duh frien.” Buh Wolf, him say: “You mek mistake. Me no
bin gwine hot you. Me dist bin er fun.” Buh Goat answer: “Yes, you yiz
bin mek up you mine fuh kill we. Haw Buck! me lub my life dist es much
es you lub yourn, an me no want hab nuttne mo fuh do long you.” Wen
Buh Wolf fine eh couldnt fool Buh Goat, eh change eh chune an eh say:
“Go long, Boy. You git way one time, but narruh chance gwine come; an
de nex time me git you een me power me yent gwine wait topper nuttne,
but me gwine pick you bone right off.” Buh Goat laugh at um, an eh
answer: “Now you done speak you mine, lemme tell you, you nebber gwine
git narruh chance fuh ketch me. Me boun fuh watch you.” An so dem part
company. Buh Goat nebber did trus Buh Wolf from dat day tel dis.




                                 LVIII.

                  DENTISTRY AT THE OLD PLANTATION HOME.

The incident which we relate occurred some forty years ago at one
of those beautiful plantations in the swamp-region of Georgia,
where the magnolia grandiflora and the live-oak mingled their noble
shadows,--where the cultivation of rice and sea-island cotton engaged
the attention of the agriculturalist,--where generous hospitality and
a patriarchal civilization abode,--and where, at a remove from city,
all operations were conducted within the limits of the liberal domain,
and through the intervention of means and servants appurtenant to the
long-established and abundant home.

Prominent among the domestics on this plantation was Daddy Jack. A
favorite servant, intelligent, obedient, courteous, and with the
manners of the old school, he was now verging upon sixty. Among other
duties devolved upon him was the general supervision of the plantation
infirmary where the sick were carefully nursed and supplied with
medicine and suitable food. Acquiring considerable knowledge in the
treatment of ordinary diseases incident to climate and exposure,
he had become, in the estimation of his fellow-servants, a famous
leech; and was at all times prepared, with entire self-possession
and dignity, to indulge in blood-letting, to administer purgatives,
prescribe hot baths, and recommend tonics. A pint of blood to reduce
the pulse, then ten grains of calomel, followed in the morning by half
a teacup of castor-oil containing three or four drops of turpentine
to impart additional potency to the dose, and finally snake-root tea
to brace up the halting system, constituted the practice in vogue in
cases of ordinary fever. If this vigorous treatment failed of the
desired effect, a repetition was generally resolved upon; and so
the patient, sometimes enfeebled to such a degree that he no longer
afforded attractive food for disease, slowly recovered in spite of
this San Grado regimen. As a supplement to his professional labors
as a physician, Daddy Jack indulged, in a rude way, in the art of
dentistry. He understood how to cut around an aching tooth with the
same lancet which he employed in blood-letting from the arm. He knew
how to annihilate an exposed and throbbing nerve with a ten-penny nail
heated red-hot. With the use of an old-fashioned extractor, with which
to pry out an offending molar tooth, sometimes even at the expense
of a fractured jaw, he was familiar. In the absence of a suitable
instrument, a strong twine string, well waxed, sufficed to pull out an
incisor.

On one occasion a strolling Yankee dentist visited the neighborhood.
For the first time Jack beheld sundry appliances which modern ingenuity
had devised for the facile extraction of teeth. In his old methods he
at once lost confidence. Application was made to his master for the
immediate purchase of certain designated lancets, and for pairs of
forceps, both straight and curved. His wish was gratified, and the
plantation was notified that he now possessed instruments with which
teeth might be extracted readily and with the least amount of pain.
An era of increased practice and of enlarged professional emolument
quickly dawned. It really appeared as if there was scarcely a negro
upon the plantation who did not have at least one tooth which “hot
um,” and which “eh wan Buh Jack fuh pull out fuh um.” The old man’s
services were frequently called into requisition, and his reputation so
increased that numbers from adjacent plantations sought and obtained
relief at his hands.

One bright spring morning, a stalwart young carpenter, John by name,
who had been suffering from a decayed jaw-tooth of huge proportions,
presented himself with swollen face and most lugubrious countenance.
The customary fee of a quarter of a dollar was paid in advance, and
Daddy Jack made ready for the operation. Seating John in a wooden chair
in the yard, and with his face turned to the sun so that the old man
could “git er fair sight at de teet,” Jack proceeded with his lancet
to separate the tooth, as far as practicable, from the engorged and
circumjacent gum. John squirmed and indulged in heart-rending groans.
As the cutting proceeded and the blood trickled from the corners
of John’s mouth, Jack encouraged his demoralized patient with the
injunction: “Tan ter um luk er man, me son. Eh yen gwine hot you much.
Eh yen gwine tek long. Me mose done. Me soon git um out.”

This preliminary operation concluded, Jack produced his forceps. John,
already appalled at the suffering which he had endured, gazed upon
the instrument with eyes as big as saucers, and resolutely closed
his mouth. To Jack’s command that he open it, he responded: “De teet
yent duh hot me no mo. I gwine.” After much persuasion Jack prevailed
upon him to open his mouth and let him “tek de ting out.” At length
the old man firmly grasped the tooth with the forceps, and began to
haul away at it. As he pulled, John commenced to rise from his seat.
Jack endeavored, with the left hand, to keep him down, while he tugged
lustily at the tooth with his right. All to no purpose. John was
quickly upon his feet, and then upon tiptoe, so that Jack could no
longer operate to any advantage. It seemed as if for once the sable
dentist was to be baffled in his aim. Nothing daunted, however, and
muttering imprecations upon his unfortunate victim, he slowly backed
across the yard, drawing John after him,--who meanwhile was giving
utterance to the most miserable and unearthly sounds from his bloody
jaws, and attempting, with uplifted hands, to arrest the traction
of the resolute old man, who refused for an instant to relax his
hold,--until he reached a flight of steps which led up to the main room
of the smoke-house. Here he hoped to acquire the advantage which he
so much desired. Ascending backward three of the steps, and quickly
placing his right foot upon John’s shoulder, so as to keep him below
and thus obtain an additional purchase, with one supreme effort he
succeeded in compassing his purpose. The tooth came out so suddenly
that the old man, losing his balance, fell heavily against the door of
the smoke-house, while John tumbled in the opposite direction, yelling
with pain, and protesting that “Uncle Jack done broke eh jaw.”

Recovering himself in a trice, and holding aloft the forceps, which
still infolded in its remorseless fangs the gory molar, with an
indescribable air of commingled dignity, scorn, and triumph addressing
the discomfited victim of his professional skill, old Jack exclaimed:
“Haw, Boy! when I graff my han on er teet, eh bown fuh come, er de jaw
pop,--one er tarruh.”

In after years the old man often recurred with manifest pride and
satisfaction to this incident, and frequently cited this exploit in
confirmation of his boast “dat no nigger teet ebber yet did git de
better er me.”




                                  LIX.

                      THE NEGRO AND THE ALLIGATOR.

Foremost among the reptiles which excited the curiosity and aroused
the fears of the Georgia colonists, upon their first acquaintance
with them, were the alligators. Francis Moore, keeper of the stores,
describing them in 1736, says: “They are terrible to look at,
stretching open an horrible large mouth big enough to swallow a Man,
with Rows of dreadful large sharp Teeth, and Feet like Draggons, armed
with great Claws, and a long Tail which they throw about with great
Strength, and which seems their best Weapon, for their Claws are feebly
set on, and the Stiffness of their Necks hinders them from turning
nimbly to bite.” In order to dissipate the general terror which these
strange saurians inspired, Mr. Oglethorpe, having wounded and caught
one of them, caused it to be carried to Savannah, where he “made the
boys bait it with sticks, and finally pelt and beat it to death.”

To the European, newly landed on these shores, the alligator was
indeed a novelty, repulsive and provocative of dread. Not so with the
negro. His ancestors were well acquainted with the African crocodile,
and their descendants, dwelling in this marsh region filled with
swamps and cypress ponds, and permeated with lagoons, creeks, and
rivers--the habitat of this formidable reptile--were from childhood
familiar with its roar, and entirely accustomed to its unsightly
appearance and habits. Among these sable myth-makers it figured as
an important _dramatis persona_. Of the dogs, geese, ducks, and hogs
of the plantation hands it was an avowed and a voracious enemy. When
skinned and thoroughly boiled, its tail was esteemed by many as a
savory article of food. For the cure of rheumatism its oil was held
in special repute, and the exuded musk was collected for medicinal
uses. Its skin, rudely tanned, entered largely into the composition
of home-made pouches and shoes. Whistles and powder-charges were
fabricated from the tusks, which also served a good turn for the
pickaninnies to rub their swollen gums against, and to cut their first
teeth upon. A constant depredator was the alligator upon the fish-traps
which guarded the mouths of the short creeks emptying into the rivers.
Upon the reflux of the tide, entering the inclosure, this reptile
gorged itself upon the fishes there detained, and incurred the wrath
of Cuffee, whose frying-pan was thus cheated out of its anticipated
evening broil. Hence it came to pass that the alligator was regarded by
the negro both as an enemy and as desirable game. During the spring and
summer they frequently met, and whenever the former could be taken at a
disadvantage its life was forfeit to the opportunity. It was killed in
rice-field ditches, in shallow ponds, and occasionally upon land. The
hoe, the axe, a fence rail, and the club were the offensive weapons;
and loud were the cries and great was the fun while the struggling
reptile was being beaten to death. In the back-waters and in swamps
where the alligators made their nests, reared their young, and dug
their holes, the negroes, during their leisure hours, were fond of
capturing them by means of a heavy iron hook fastened to the end of a
long, stout pole. This was thrust into the hole where the reptile lay.
While snapping at the hook, with its irritating prong, the alligator
was in the end securely caught with the barb, and then came the tug of
war. It was in no wise an easy operation to draw from its hiding-place
one of these reluctant, excited, and revolving monsters. For this
purpose the combined strength of several stalwart men barely sufficed.
The frolic was joyous, and the exultant shouts of those engaged in the
sport awakened strange echoes in the depths of the dank and moss-clad
swamps.

If we may credit the text of the “Brevis Narratio” of Le Moyne de
Morgues, the Florida Indians were addicted to similar sport, and Plate
XXVI may well be claimed in practical illustration of the amusement to
which we are now alluding.

During the period of hibernation the negroes often dug these reptiles
out of their holes. Sometimes the alligator attained huge proportions,
measuring, from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail, fourteen
feet. It was fond of a given locality, and exercised exclusive dominion
over some favorite bend in the river, some chosen part of a lake, or
some attractive pool in the swamp. The patriarch, with its attendant
consort and progeny, there reigned supreme, unless, after severe
battle, it was driven away by one more powerful.

In ante-bellum days, when firearms were denied to the negro population,
alligators were far more numerous than they are at present. The great
demand for their skins which has arisen of late, the use of the rifle
in the hands of the tourist, and the employment of the shot-gun by
the freedmen have united in causing a frightful mortality among these
reptiles. Bartram says that when he visited the River St. John the
alligators at one point “were in such incredible numbers, and so close
together from shore to shore, that it would have been easy to have
walked across on their heads, had the animals been harmless.”

For the capture of animals drinking at the water’s edge, or swimming
in lake or river, the tail was employed. A stunning blow having thus
been delivered, the victim was caught in the open jaws, and thence
transported to the dwelling-place of the reptile, where it was guarded
until decomposition had fairly supervened. It was then eaten at leisure
and with apparent relish. Sometimes days were allowed to elapse before
the slain animal or bird became suitably seasoned for the feast.

While hogs, dogs, calves, sheep, geese, and ducks were often captured
by alligators, they seldom attacked human beings. Of mankind they
apparently entertained an inborn fear, and would quit the part of the
river or lagoon in which men or even boys were swimming. Instances are
rare in which human life has been sacrificed to the voracity of these
monsters. The writer remembers several occasions, however, on which
men and children were attacked by alligators. He will be pardoned for
recalling one of them.

Sawney had a wife who resided upon a neighboring plantation. It was
his habit to visit his wife every Saturday night, and remain with her
until Monday morning. On these journeys he would carry a bag containing
provisions and such choice morsels as he had been able, during the
week, to accumulate for his better half. Near the negro quarter, where
he resided on the home-plantation, was a small creek, in which the tide
ebbed and flowed. A large log furnished convenient means for crossing
it. On the night in question, shortly after dark, Sawney shouldered
his well-filled bag and set out for his wife’s house. The tide was
flowing into the creek. Instead of crossing on the log, he saw fit to
descend the gentle bank and wade through the water. It was not more
than half-leg deep, and the creek was only some ten yards wide. When
he was in the middle of the stream his attention was attracted by a
movement in the water. Instead of getting out upon the bank, which he
could readily have done, he paused, and began to parley with what, in
the darkness, he conceived to be a “sperit.” “Tan back, Mossa Sperit,
an lemme pass. Tan back, Mossa Sperit; me do you no harm.” In this
idiotic and frightened manner he stood idly talking, until what proved
to be a large alligator approached and laid violent hold of his right
leg. He was quickly thrown down by the reptile. In the confusion which
ensued, and amid the struggles and yells of the negro, the alligator
for the moment relaxed its hold, and was attracted by the fallen bag,
which it tore in pieces. Sawney had so completely lost his wits, was
so terrified, and was suffering so much pain, that he neglected to
improve the opportunity thus afforded, and betake himself to flight. He
remained rooted to the spot, howling, praying, and calling for help.
Having in a little while disposed of the bag, the alligator renewed
its attack upon the frightened negro, threw him down, broke his left
arm, and frightfully lacerated it and one of his legs.

The negroes at the quarter hard by, hearing the noise and cries for
help, armed with torches, hoes, axes, and billets, rushed to the spot
just in time to save the life of the unfortunate man. The alligator was
beaten to death. It measured nearly eleven feet, and was very stout.
Sawney’s wounds proved well-nigh fatal. He was confined to his cabin
for quite three months, and, during that time, required and received
the careful attention of a competent surgeon.

The lazy way in which the negro was in the habit of fishing, perched
upon a tussock, with feet and rod trailing in the water, somnolent and
in utter silence, did sometimes invite and receive a flirt from the
tail of the reigning alligator, defending its preserves against all
poachers.

The old memories are fast drifting away into the shadows, and the
modern negro and the alligator of the present are but partial types of
things that were.




                                   LX.

                                SPERITS.

Among the negroes of the coast region of Georgia and the Carolinas a
belief in the existence of ghosts, “sperits,” and superhuman influences
was very general. Especially did it obtain among the ordinary
field-hands and those least educated. Comparatively few there were
who could lift themselves entirely above the superstitious fears born
in Africa and perpetuated by tradition in their new home. Memories of
Fetichism, of Totemism, and of Anthropomorphism were strangely mingled
with the teachings of Christianity, and in their religious exercises
the emotional predominated over the intellectual. The potency of charms
and philters was freely admitted, and it was necessary to restrain the
practice of Fetichism by positive inhibition, or by labored persuasion
of its utter absurdity. The fabrication of Fetiches, and their sale
to those who desired to utilize the powers of the deities which they
were supposed to represent, were monopolized by old women, who derived
considerable gain from this calling. The idea was by such means to
conjure the neighbor against whom enmity was cherished, and thus
subject him or her to the malign influences of the spirit or demon
whose power was supposed to inhere in the evil charm.

The ordinary Fetich consisted of a bunch of rusty nails, bits of red
flannel, and pieces of brier-root tied together with a cotton string. A
toad’s foot, a snake’s tooth, a rabbit’s tail, or a snail’s shell was
sometimes added. In price it varied from twenty-five cents to a dollar.
To insure the efficacy of the desired spell, it was necessary that
the charm should be secretly deposited under the pillow of the party
to be affected, placed upon the post of a gate through which he would
pass, or buried beneath the doorsteps of his cabin. Once persuaded of
the fact that he had been thus conjured, the patient became possessed
of superstitious fears, and often complained of bodily “miseries,”
which apparently defied the power of the healing art, and were wholly
dissipated only when some atonement was made for the alleged wrong, or
payment offered to have the spell broken through the intervention of
the conjurer who had devised it.

In the conduct of plantations, difficulty and annoyance were not
infrequently experienced from the interference of these old negro
women,--conjurers,--who, in plying their secret trade, gave rise to
disturbances and promoted strife and disquietude.

To the apprehension of the common field-hand there was no gainsaying
the fact that the spirits of the departed walked the earth and
revisited the scenes of their former occupancy. It was not accorded
to every one to see and to commune with them. Only those “born with
a caul” were capable of doing so. Such were never terrified by these
ghostly visitors. By their fellows they were held in special esteem.
To this favored class did July belong. I inquired, on one occasion,
whether he believed in ghosts and could see spirits. “Yes, Mossa,” was
his reply, “me kin shum. You know me bin born wid caul. People wuh no
bin born wid caul kin yeddy sperit, but dem cant shum. Sperit kin skade
um, too, but dem cant skade me. Me kin walk long um der road, talk ter
um een de bush, see dem een me bed, and yeddy um een de grabe yad. Me
an sperit good fren.”

How do they look? “Same luk wen dem bin libe, ceptin dem look lucker
shadder, an dem walk backwuds, an dem face tun backwud, an de heel teh
eh foot day way eh toe orter be. Dem dont tetch de groun wid dem foot,
but dem sorter dis skim pon topper de grass. Dem so light dem cant mek
track.”

What garments do they wear? “Same cloze wuh dem bury een. Way dem gwine
git any mo? De cloze hab eh shape, but you kin see dey yent nuttne
eenside er um.”

What do they do? “Nuttne, so fur es me know, cept walk bout, wisit dem
ole home, an notus wuh duh gwine on sence dem leff.”

Do they ever trouble anybody? “No, me nebber see dem trubble nobody.
Dem wunt talk ter you. Dem go een gang ob two er tree, an wander bout
tel sich an sich er time, wen dem haffer go back ter dem grabe. Me see
dem wuk dem mouf same luk dem bin er talk ter one anurrer, an shake dem
head, an pint dem finger. Dem onderstan one anurrer. Me bin question
dem mo na once, but dem nebber will mek answer. Heap er time me jine
compny wid dem der big road, an try fuh gage dem een conbersation, an
fine out who dem yis, an how dey mek out; but dem nebber will tell me,
an, befo long, look luk dem git bex, an den dey fade way een de wood an
leff me lone een de road.”

Can you recognize them? “Yes, Mossa, ef I bin know dem befo dey dead,
I kin know dem now. Me kin see dem dist es plain es me kin see you
now. Only tarruh night me bin comin from Barnedo plantation. Dest es I
cross de causeway an rise de hill by Shannul ole buryin-groun me see
Miley,--wuh bin dead de year arter freedom,--duh lean genst one oak
tree sider de road. Day dis biggin fuh broke. Me gone up ter um an me
try fuh pass de time er day wid um, fuh me yent bin see um sence dat
rainy ebenin wen we bury um in Shannul. Miley look say eh bin want fuh
ax me someting; an den, all ob a sutten, eh check isself, an eh tun
roun an mek off fuh de grabe-yad. Me foller um, an wen eh come teh eh
own grabe eh pit eh head down, an eh gie two er tree whul, an down eh
gone. Me walk up en sarche de grabe. Me cant fine out how Miley git
een. De grass yent mash. De groun yent broke; no hole day: an yet me
see um, wid me own yeye, gone down, head foremose, een eh grabe.

“Las winter me en George bin er hunt possum een Jerrido bottom. We bin
ketch two fat possum, an dest befo we mek up we mine fuh go back home
we buil one fire fuh wam weself. De night berry cole. Wen we bin er wam
we han an we foot roun de fire, yuh come ole Uncle Andrew, wuh nusen
ter dribe fur ole Mossa, an ole Uncle Jupter, wuh bin de gadner, an ole
Aunt Peggy. Dem walk up tarrur side de fire an look at we, but dem yent
bin crack eh teet ter we. Me see dem plain, en me try fuh pint dem out
to George. Him couldnt shum, cause George yent bin born wid caul. De
dog nebber notus um. Bimeby George hair biggin fuh rise. George skade,
an we leff fuh de nigger house.

“You member Jacob wuh dem bin heng een de Boro? Well, me an Sam meet um
one moon-shiny night een de big road, wid de een er de rope tie roun
eh neck. Me kin tell you bout heap er people me bin meet an see arter
dem done dead an bury. Me shum mose ebry night. Me kin show you some
ter-night ef you bin born wid caul. Many time dem people wuh cant see
sperit come pon top dem an dunno nuttne bout um. Enty wen you duh walk
long de road der night you suttenly feel hot win bresh by you cheek?
Enty you sometime smell dead man finger? Enty you yeddy bush crack der
wood wen de win yent der blow? Dem duh sperit, but you no know. Sperit
der walk close by you, but you no shum. Me could pint dem out an tell
you who dem yiz.”

Are you not afraid of these spirits? “No, Mossa; wuh me gwine fade um
fuh? Dem nuttne cept de shape er people wid de sperit eenside. De bone
an meat done leff um. Dem cant hot nobody. Eh breff cant pizen you; an
ef eh did knock at you, eh dis same es ef win try fuh hit you.”

Why do they come out of their graves? “Me dunno, cept dem want fuh see
one anurrer, an wisit dem ole home, an look pon topper dem ole fren.”

Are they all grown? “No, sir; you see dem all size, leetle an big, man
an ooman, gal an boy, an leely baby. My leely Sue, wuh dead, blan come
an play bout de house ebry now an den. One time me try fuh ketch um up
in me arm, but me han gone clean tru um dis luk er shadder, an den eh
wanish, an me so sorry.”

These notions of July may be accepted as typifying the belief on this
subject entertained by the great majority of the negroes on the coast.
Many went a step further, and invested these ghosts and “sperits” with
the ability to intervene in mundane affairs, and to entail harm and
misfortune upon those with whom they had not lived amicably while in
the flesh. It was the belief of some of the African tribes that the
power of a ghost bore some relation to that which the being possessed
when alive, and it may be that an inherited thought affords at least a
partial explanation of the ideas still entertained by their descendants
upon the shores of this New World.




                                  LXI.

                         DADDY JUPITER’S VISION.

     Dreams are intimately associated with the lower forms of
     religion.... During sleep the spirit seems to desert the
     body; and as in dreams we visit other localities and even
     other worlds, living as it were a separate and different
     life, the two phenomena are not unnaturally regarded as the
     complements of one another.--SIR JOHN LUBBOCK.


Daddy Jupiter was an old man when I first knew him. In the capacity of
a body servant he had accompanied his master during the campaign of
1812-15; and this fact, apart from his excellent character, elevated
him in the esteem of all. For many years prior to his death he was
practically “off duty,” keeping in-doors whenever he did not feel
entirely well, and in pleasant weather working in the vegetable garden.
He was fond of his chickens and pigs, and cultivated on his own account
a small patch where arrowroot, long collards, sugar-cane, tanniers,
ground-nuts, benne, gourds, and watermelons grew in commingled
luxuriance. A widower and without children, he led, in the main, a
retired life; seldom visiting at the houses of the other negroes on
the plantation, but always chatting pleasantly with all who came to
see him. At the “Praise-House” his seat was never vacant when his
health permitted him to be present, and he filled the office of a
“watchman” upon the plantation. It was the duty of one occupying that
station to advise in spiritual matters, to lead in the semi-weekly
prayer-meetings, to set an example which others might well follow,
and to counsel in all religious difficulties. Although somewhat
quick-tempered, and jealous of that respect which he deemed his due
from others, he was upright, honest, full of Christian sentiment, and
pronounced in his condemnation of everything savoring of evil. In a
word, he was a man of good reputation, enjoyed the confidence of his
fellows, stood high in his church, and was supposed to be in special
favor with the Lord.

During the winter preceding his death Jupiter suffered much from
rheumatism. For weeks together he ventured no further than the door of
his cabin, where he would sit and sun himself and smoke his clay pipe.
A negro lad, Cæsar by name, had been deputed to cook for him, to wait
upon him, and to minister to his needs.

I called one morning to see the old man, to inquire after his health,
and to ascertain whether his wants were properly supplied. For an hour
and more he entertained me, as was his wont, with tales of the olden
time, and was evidently in excellent spirits. As I was about to depart,
Cæsar said: “Mossa, Uncle Jupter bin hab er wision las night. Leh him
tell you bout um.” My curiosity being excited, I resumed my seat,
and inquired: “Daddy, is that true? Have you had a vision?” “Yes, me
chile,” he answered, “me suttenly did hab er wision, an er berry good
one too.” “Tell me about it,” I rejoined. “Well, yeddy me,” replied the
old man, and he spoke as follows:--

“Las night, dis befo fus fowl crow, me bin er leddown een me bed. De
moon done set. Cæsar, him bin ter sleep by de fire een de tarruh room.
Eberyting on de plantation gone bed. Me bin study bout de time wen
ole Jupter hab ter meet him Lord and Master, an me berry happy een me
bussum. Den me drap ter sleep. How long me bin ter sleep me dunno,
but all ob er sutten pear like ebry shingle an boad hab er crack, an
de light stream tru, an de room bin bright es day. Wile me duh wonder
wudduh dat, four leely angel, wuh dress een wite an hab wing on eh
back, fly een de room. Two light topper de foot er de bed, an one on
arur side er me. My! but dem bin pooty! Me see heap er pooty wite
chillun een me time, but me nebber bin see nuttne teh come up ter dem,
nur ter ketch nigh um. Dem look pon topper me so kind, an dey open
an shet dem wing, an mek sich a cool breeze een de house. Bimeby me
retch out me han fuh tell de one huddy wuh bin tan close me bed on de
right side, but eh draw back, an eh say: ‘Jupter, we come fuh leh you
know de blessed Jesus duh commin fuh cahr you up ter Hebben an show
you de seat wuh eh hab ready fur you.’ Me dat glad me yent hab bref
fuh mek ansur. Me hard fuh bleebe me own yez. Me harte rise up een me
troat, an me yent duh say nuttne, but me duh watch fur de Lord. Soon de
blessed Jesus, wid de print er de nail een eh han an eh foot, an wid de
star on eh head, drap right down tru de top er de house dout crack er
shingle, an eh call me name, an eh tell me fuh rise, an eh pit eh han
onder me shoulder, an eh liff me up light es er fedder. Me ole cloze
an me ole body leff behine, an somehow narruh me sperit, him keep de
shape er de body. Den eh pit eh han onder me arm, an eh cahr me way up
eenter de element, beyant de sun an de moon an de star, an de leely
angel duh foller we. We gone an we gone way up tel we git ter er big
alablaster house, wid high piazza all roun an roun, wuh shine same luk
de sun, buil in de middle er a beautiful gaden wid flower, an fruit, an
hummin-bud, an butterfly, an angel wid harp duh sing an duh joy ehself
onder de tree. Dis es we git ter de big gate, wuh mek wid pearl, eh
swing open dout tetch um, an de blessed Jesus lead dis poor ole nigger
up de shinin pate to de big house way de Lord lib.

“We gone up de step an enter de pahler, way de great God bin er set on
eh golden trone. Den de blessed Jesus mek de good Lord sensible dat dis
duh Jupter wuh him hab sabe, an dat eh fetch um fuh show um eh seat
wuh eh done prepare fur um. Wid dat de Lord, him call teh one angel,
an eh tell um fuh bring one chair an set um down befo eh trone. Soon
es dis bin done eh say: ‘Jupter, yuh you chair; set een um. Eh blants
ter you.’ Mossa, you nebber bin see sech chair een all you life. Eh hab
gold rocker ter um. Eh hab welwit cushin een eh bottom. Eh hab high
back, an eh arm stuff. Eh so soffe an easy. Eh look pootier den dat big
rockin chair wuh ole Mossa bin gib Missy wen eh marry you farruh. Me
shame fuh set een de chair, but de blessed Jesus, him courage me, an me
tek me seat, an me so tankful dat me hab one chair een de mansion een
de sky.

“Den de blessed Jesus tell anurruh angel fuh bring me some milk an
honey fuh drink. Eh bring um een a nice glass tumbler, an eh gen me fuh
drink. Me tase um, an eh sweet mone anyting me ebber drink een me life.
Eh tell me fuh drink um down, an wen me drink all outer de glass, an me
yeye ketch sight er de bottom er de tumbler, me see some speck. De ting
trouble me, fuh me dunno wuh mek speck day een de bottom er dat clean
tumbler. Den de blessed Master notus me, an eh say: ‘Dont fret, Jupter;
dem speck duh you sin, but now dem all leff behine.’

“All dis time me bin er set wid me face tun way from de Lord an eh
trone, cause eh so great an bright me couldnt look pon topper um.
Mossa, me cant scribe wuh me see an yeddy een dat Hebben. Eh yent fuh
tell. De blessed Jesus tek me tru de gaden, down by de ribber, an een
de orchud way de bigges peach, an fig, an orange, an pomegranate, an
watermillion, an all kin der fruit der grow. Me see heap er good
people wuh me bin know befo eh dead. Ole Mossa, Cappne Maxwell, ole Mr.
Ashmore, Buh Jack, Sister Masha, me own Dinah, an mo bin day, an dem
all hab harp, an bin der sing, an walk bout, an der pledjur ehself. Dem
glad fuh see me too, an gen me de right han er fellership.

“Arter me bin in Hebben good wile, de blessed Master, him say: ‘Come,
Jupter, I gwine show you way de bad people go.’ Den eh lead me down to
one bottom wuh dark an kibber wid cloud. In de fur een me see smoke duh
rise, an me yeddy people duh cry an duh holler so bad. Wen we git ter
dat spot, lo an behole! day was de mouf er Hell. Satan, him bin day wid
eh pitchfork, an eh black head wid screech-owl yez, an eh red yeye, an
eh claw-han, an eh forky tail. Eh tan right at de mouf er de big hole
way de smoke an de fire duh bile out. Fas as de tarruh debble bring
sinner ter um, eh push um wid eh pitchfork an eh trow um een de fire.
Lord Amighty! Mossa, how dem sinner did kick an holler an try fuh pull
way! But twant no use. De minnit ole Satan graff eh claw on um eh gone,
an you could yeddy um duh fry een de fire same luk fat een me pan yuh.
Me bin rale skade. De ting mek me sick. Me hole on ter me Jesus, an him
tell me not teh fade, dat nuttne shill trouble me.

“Dis at dat time me wake. Me hair bin a rise on me head, an wen me come
fuh fine out me bin een me own bed, an fowl bin a crow fuh day. Oh,
Mossa! dat ting wuh dem call Hell duh a bad place. Me no wan shum no
mo, an me yent gwine day nurrer. Enty de blessed Jesus done show me de
chair wuh eh done sabe fuh me een Hebben? Yes, Mossa, me seat eh fix,
an ole Jupter ready fur go wenebber de Lord call.”

He was indeed prepared, and early in the spring we laid him to rest
beneath the venerable live-oaks which, with their solemn arms, guarded
the plantation burying-ground. Then, not in a vision, but in reality,
as we believe, the good old man claimed and was accorded his seat in
the “mansion not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.”




                                GLOSSARY


  _Abnue_, avenue
  _Agg_, egg
  _All ob er sutten_, quickly and unexpectedly
  _An_, and
  _Arter_, after
  _Arur_, each, either
  _Ax_, ask

  _Bactize_, baptize
  _Bague_, to beg
  _Barruh_, barrow
  _Beber_, beaver
  _Bedout_, without
  _Ben_, bend, bent, been
  _Berry_, very
  _Bes_, best
  _Bex_, vex, vexed
  _Bidness_, business
  _Biggin_, begin, began
  _Bimeby_, by and by, presently
  _Binner_, was, were
  _Bittle_, victuals
  _Blan_, in the habit of, accustomed to
  _Blanks_⎫
  _Blants_⎭ belongs to
  _Bleebe_, believe
  _Bleege_, obliged, compelled
  _Bodder_, to bother
  _Bode_, board, boards
  _Bofe_, both
  _Bole_, bold
  _Boun_, resolved upon, forced to
  _Bredder_, brother
  _Bref_, breath
  _Bres_, breast
  _Bresh_, brush-wood, to brush
  _Broke up_, to leave, to depart
  _Brukwus_, breakfast
  _Buckra_, white man
  _Bud_, bird
  _Budduh_⎫
  _Buh_   ⎭ brother
  _Buhhine_, behind
  _Bun_, burn
  _Buss_, burst, or break through

  _Cahr_, carry
  _Caze_, because
  _Ceive_, deceive
  _Cept_, accept, accepted, except
  _Chillun_, children
  _Chimbly_, chimney
  _Chune_, tune
  _Cist_, insist
  _Clorte_, cloth
  _Cloze_, clothes
  _Cohoot_, bargain, agreement
  _Cole_, cold
  _Conjunct_, agree to, conclude
  _Cote_, court
  _Crack eh teet_, make answer
  _Crap_, crop
  _Crape_, scrape
  _Cratch_, scratch
  _Cut down_, disappointed, chagrined

  _Darter_, daughter
  _Day_, there, is, to be, am
  _Day day_, to be there
  _Den_, then
  _Der_, was, were, into
  _Dest_⎫
  _Dist_⎭ just, only
  _Destant_, distant, distance
  _Det_, death
  _Diffunce_, difference
  _Disher_, this
  _Do_, door
  _Dout_, without
  _Drap_, drop, dropped
  _Duh_, was, were
  _Dunno_, don’t know
  _Dut_, dirt

  _Edder_, other
  _Eeben_, even
  _Een_, in, end
  _Eenwite_, invite
  _Ef_, if
  _Eh_, he, she, it, his, her, its
  _Element_, the sky, upper air
  _En_, end
  _Enty_, are you not, are they not, do you not, do they not, is it not

  _Faber_, favor
  _Faid_, to be afraid
  _Fambly_, family
  _Fanner_, a shallow basket
  _Farruh_⎫
  _Farrur_⎭ father
  _Feber_, fever
  _Fedder_, feather, feathers
  _Fiel_, field
  _Fine_, supply with food, find
  _Flaber_, flavor
  _Flo_, floor
  _Flut_, flirt
  _Foce_, force
  _Forrud_, forehead
  _Fren_, friend
  _Fros_, frost
  _Fuh_, for
  _Fuh sutten_, for a certainty
  _Fuss_, first

  _Gage_, engage, hire
  _Gedder_, gather, collect
  _Gelt_, to girt
  _Gem_, to give
  _Gen_, gave, again
  _Gie_, give
  _Gimme_, give me
  _Glec_, neglect
  _Glub_, gloves
  _Gooly_, good
  _Graff_, grab
  _Gree_, agree, consent
  _Grine salt_, fly round and round
  _Guine_⎫
  _Gwine_⎭ going, going to

  _Haffer_, have to, had to
  _Hair rise_, badly frightened
  _Haky_ ⎫
  _Harky_⎭ hearken to, heed
  _Han_, hand
  _Hanker_, long for, desire
  _Hatchich_, hatchet
  _Head_, get the better of
  _Head um_, get ahead of him
  _Hebby_, heavy
  _Holler_, halloo, hollow
  _Hoona_, you
  _Hot_, to hurt
  _Huccum_, how happens it, why, how come
  _Huddy_, how d’ye do

  _Ile me bade_, grease my mouth
  _Isself_, himself, herself, itself, themselves

  _Jew_, dew
  _Jist_, just
  _Juk_, jerk

  _Ketch_, catch, reach to, approach
  _Kibber_, cover
  _Kine_, kind
  _Knowledge_, acknowledge, admit

  _Labuh_, labor
  _Lass_, to suffice for, to last
  _Lean fuh_, set out for
  _Led-down_, lay down
  _Leek_, to lick with the tongue
  _Leely_ ⎫
  _Leetle_⎭ little
  _Leff_, to leave, did leave, left
  _Leggo_, to let go
  _Leh_, let
  _Lemme_, let me
  _Lenk_, length
  _Libbin_, living
  _Lick_, to whip, stroke of the whip
  _Lickin_, whipping
  _Lick back_, turn rapidly back
  _Lief_, leave, permission
  _Light on_, to mount
  _Light out_, to start off
  _Long_, with, from
  _Lub_, love
  _Luk_   ⎫
  _Lucker_⎭ like

  _Mange_, mane
  _Medjuh_, measure
  _Mek_, make, made
  _Mek fuh_, to go to
  _Mek out_, fare, thrive, succeed
  _Member_, to remind
  _Men eh pace_, increase his speed
  _Mine_, mind, heed, take care of
  _Miration_, wonder, astonishment
  _Mo_, more
  _Moober_, moreover
  _Mona_ ⎫
  _Moner_⎭ more than
  _Mona dat_, more than that
  _Mose_, almost
  _Mossa_, master
  _Mouf_⎫
  _Mout_⎭ mouth
  _Murrer_, mother
  _Mussne_, must not
  _Muster_, must have

  _Nabor_, neighbor
  _Narruh_, another
  _Nebber_, never
  _Nekked_, naked
  _Nes_, nest
  _New Nigger_, a negro fresh from Africa
  _Nigh_, to draw near to
  _Notus_, notice, observe
  _Noung_, young
  _Nudder_, another
  _Nuff_, enough
  _Nummine_, never mind
  _Nurrer_, neither, another
  _Nuse_, use, employ
  _Nussen_, used to, accustomed to
  _Nuss_, nurse
  _Nuttne_, nothing

  _Obersheer_, overseer
  _Offer_, off of
  _Ole_, old
  _Ooman_, woman, women
  _Out_, to go out, to extinguish
  _Outer_, out of

  _Pahler_, parlor
  _Passon_, parson
  _Pate_, path
  _Pen pon_, depend upon
  _Perwision_, provisions
  _Pinder_, ground-nuts, peanuts
  _Pint_, direct, directed, point
  _Pintment_, appointment
  _Pit_, put, apply
  _Playpossum_, to fool, to practice deceit
  _Pledjuh_, pleasure
  _Po_, poor, pour
  _Pon_, upon
  _Pooty_, pretty
  _Pose_, post
  _Prommus_, promise
  _Pruppus_, on purpose
  _Pusson_, person

  _Quaintun_, acquainted with
  _Quaintance_, acquaintances
  _Quile_, to coil, coiled
  _Quire_, to inquire, inquired

  _Rale_, very truly, really
  _Range_, reins
  _Rastle_, to wrestle
  _Retch_, to reach, to arrive at
  _Ribber_, river
  _Riz_, rose
  _Roose_, roost

  _Sabe_, to know
  _San_, sand
  _Sarbis_, service, kindness
  _Satify_ ⎫
  _Saterfy_⎭ satisfied, happy, content
  _Scace_, scarce
  _Schway_, to swear, swore
  _Scuse_, excuse
  _Seaznin_, seasoning
  _Sebbn_, seven
  _Sed_, sit, sat
  _Sed-down_, sit down, sat down
  _Shet_, shut
  _Sho_, sure
  _Sholy_, surely
  _Shum_, to see it, see him, see her, see them
  _Sider_, on the side of
  _Sisso_, say so
  _Skade_, scared
  _Smate_, smart
  _Sofe_, soft
  _Soon man_, very smart, wide-awake man
  _Sorter_, sort of, after a fashion
  _Sparruh_, sparrow
  _Spec_, expect
  _Spose_, expose
  _Spute_, contest the championship with
  _State_, start, begin
  _Steader_⎫
  _Stidder_⎭ instead of
  _Straighten fur_, run rapidly for
  _Stroy_, destroy
  _Sukkle_, circle, fly around
  _Summuch_, so much
  _Sutten_, certain, sudden
  _Suttenly_, certainly, suddenly
  _Swade_, persuade
  _Swode_, sword

  _Tack_, to attack
  _Tackle_, to hold to account
  _Tan_, to stand
  _Tarrify_, to terrify, to annoy
  _Tarruh_ ⎫
  _Turruh_ ⎭ the other
  _Tase_, to taste, taste
  _Tay_, stay
  _Tek_, take
  _Tek wid um_, pleased with him, her, or it
  _Tek you foot_, to walk
  _Tel_, until
  _Ten_, attend to
  _Tend_, intend
  _Tenk_  ⎫
  _Tenky_ ⎭ to thank, thanks
  _Ter_ ⎫
  _Teh_ ⎭ to
  _Tetch_, touch
  _Tetter_, potatoes
  _Tick_, thick, abundant, a stick
  _Ticket_, thicket
  _Tickler_, particular
  _Tief_, to steal, thief
  _Ting_, thing
  _Tird_, third
  _Titter_, sister
  _Togerruh_, together
  _Tole_, told
  _Topper_, on top of, on
  _Tote_, carry
  _Trabble_, travel
  _Tru_, through
  _Truss_, trust
  _Trute_, truth
  _Tuff_, tuft
  _Tuk_, took
  _Tun_, turn, return
  _Tun flour_, to cook hominy

  _Up ter de notch_, in the best style
  _Usen_, to be in the habit of

  _Vise_, to advise
  _Vive_, revive

  _Wan_, to want, to wish, want
  _Warse_, wasp
  _Wase_, waste
  _Way_, where
  _Wayebber_, wherever
  _Whalin ob er_, enormous, severe
  _Wid_, with
  _Wile_, while
  _Win_, wind
  _Wine_, vine
  _Wish de time er day_, to say good-bye, how d’ye do
  _Wud_, word
  _Wudduh dat_, what is that
  _Wuffer_, what for, why, what to
  _Wuh_, what, which, who
  _Wuhebbuh_, whatever
  _Wuk_, work
  _Wul_, world
  _Wunt_, will not, would not
  _Wurrum_, worms
  _Wus_, worse
  _Wus den nebber_, worse than ever
  _Wut_, worth

  _Yad_, yard
  _Yearin_, hearing
  _Yeddy_, to hear, to hearken to
  _Yender_ ⎫
  _Yent_   ⎭ not, was not, were not
  _Yent day day_, is not there, are not there
  _Yeye_, eye, eyes
  _Yez_, ear, ears
  _Yiz_, am, is, to be, did
  _Yuh_, here

  _Zamine_, examine


NUMBERS

  _One_, one
  _Two_, two
  _Tree_, three
  _Fo_, four
  _Fibe_, five
  _Six_, six
  _Sebbn_, seven
  _Eight_, eight
  _Nine_, nine
  _Ten_, ten
  _Lebbn_, eleven
  _Twelbe_, twelve
  _Tirteen_, thirteen
  _Foteen_, fourteen
  _Fifteen_, fifteen
  _Sixteen_, sixteen
  _Sebbnteen_, seventeen
  _Eighteen_, eighteen
  _Nineteen_, nineteen
  _Twenty_, twenty
  _Tirty_, thirty
  _Forty_, forty
  _Fifty_, fifty
  _Sixty_, sixty
  _Sebbnty_, seventy
  _Eighty_, eighty
  _Ninety_, ninety
  _One hundud_, one hundred
  _One tousan_, one thousand


MONTHS OF THE YEAR

  _Jinnywerry_, January
  _Febbywerry_, February
  _Mache_, March
  _Aprul_, April
  _May_, May
  _June_, June
  _Jully_, July
  _Augus_, August
  _Sectember_, September
  _October_, October
  _Nowember_, November
  _December_, December


DAYS OF THE WEEK

  _Mundy_, Monday
  _Chuseday_, Tuesday
  _Wensday_, Wednesday
  _Tursday_, Thursday
  _Friday_, Friday
  _Sattyday_, Saturday
  _Sunday_, Sunday




Transcriber’s Note

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Footnotes were renumbered sequentially and were moved to the end
of the story in which the anchor occurs. The following were amended:

  Added close quotation mark to sentence:
    “Tenky, tenky, ... me git all dis money.”
  Changed ‘heaper’ to ‘heap er’ ... eenwite heap er fren ...
  Changed ‘ob er’ to ‘ober’ ... all ober sutten, ...
  Changed ‘XLI’ to ‘LXI’ for final chapter number.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEGRO MYTHS FROM THE GEORGIA COAST, TOLD IN THE VERNACULAR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


