The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pig iron
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pig iron
        Short stories

Author: Dudrea Parker

Release date: June 26, 2025 [eBook #76387]

Language: English

Original publication: Baltimore: The Norman Remington Company, 1921

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIG IRON ***





                                PIG IRON

                              SHORT STORIES

                         _BY . DUDREA . PARKER_
                          [MRS. SUMNER PARKER]

                             [Illustration]

                  Printed in the U. S. A. at Baltimore,
                     THE NORMAN, REMINGTON COMPANY,
                One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-one.




                            _Copyright, 1921_
                               The Norman,
                            Remington Company

                          _All rights reserved_




                                   TO
                                MY MOTHER




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                    Page

An Ephemeral Love,                                                    11

The White Petal,                                                      69

The Reporter,                                                         89




                           AN EPHEMERAL LOVE


Betty listlessly extended her hand to Walter; he bade her good-bye and
strolled slowly homeward. That he was worried was evidenced by the
nervous energy with which he smoked one cigarette after another until a
box was consumed before he reached the door of his home, which stood on
the hill leading to the railroad and bordering the fashionable district
of Baltimore.

Was it Betty’s interest in or love for another man that caused her
apparent indifference, or was it his poverty that caused her to hold
herself aloof from him? He knew full well that he had no luxuries
to offer, yet the thought of her slipping from him forever made him
desperate.

Walter was not visionary--he could not afford to be so; on the
contrary, he was ultra-conservative, a quality not his by inheritance,
but by compulsion. Since his father’s death he had paid off some bills,
supported his mother, saved a few thousand dollars, and managed to
extend his business somewhat. Yet, as I say, luxuries were far from
his reach--but tonight he craved them as never before. He condemned
himself and attributed his poverty to his bovine stupidity. He was
thirty and had a well-established lumber business, by means of which he
believed another man could have attained wealth and position by this
time.

These and similar thoughts passed through his mind--they come to
all of us at times when our personal affairs loom so large upon our
horizons--as he sat in his bedroom rocking on a straight-back chair. He
was debating a big idea--a resolution to embark upon a business venture
that had presented itself to him a short while before. It was not a
speculation, but an original idea that involved risk, yet offered in
return great wealth if it proved successful.

After an hour or more of deliberation he started to retire, entirely
convinced that the proposition was feasible, and that tomorrow he would
act upon his decision.

Nine o’clock found him in the office of the National Transportation
Company.

“Son, is Mr. Bailey, your purchasing agent, here?” he asked of the
clerk.

“Just this second come,” answered the boy, showing Walter into the
agent’s office.

Mr. Bailey, a jolly-faced man, arose.

“Good morning; what can I do for you?” he inquired, pushing forward a
chair.

“My name is Walter Gary. I’m in the lumber business and I’ve come to
talk to you about dunnage. I understand that you are paying about
twenty dollars a thousand feet for the rough plank lumber, which you
use to separate and pack your cargoes of wheat for England.”

“Yes,” replied the agent.

“My business,” continued Walter, “is wholesale lumber, and I represent
large Southern mills, besides having a yard fairly well stocked on
the water front. My proposition is to furnish you, without charge,
lumber of good grade--ones, twos and commons, good lengths, which will
make less work in separating cargoes, and being of good quality will
be reasonably free from knots and shakes and much more satisfactory
material to handle. However, we are not giving you something for
nothing, although you will be free from expense in handling it. What
we ask is that you deliver the lumber to our agents at dock in England
when you have unloaded the wheat. You see, we both will profit by the
transaction, as it will free you from your usual expense and at the
same time will enable me to overcome the high rate of ocean freight.”

The agent paced slowly up and down, with his hands thrust into his
pockets, listening attentively to what Walter had to say. He was not an
agent possessed of his own importance, as agents usually are, but made
the situation easy by a kindly nod of his head at intervals--and with
each nod Walter saw visions of his own home and Betty as its mistress.

“That sounds like a pretty clever scheme,” he said, continuing to walk
back and forth. “Can we always have dunnage when we want it? In other
words can we depend upon you?”

“Most assuredly,” answered Walter, in the tone of one accustomed to
keeping his word. “We will furnish bond guaranteeing deliveries.”

“Of course, it would have to be submitted to the president and
directors before I could act, but if you care to put your proposition
in writing and will return tomorrow at three, I shall try to get in
touch with them immediately.”

It was hard for Walter to conceal his elation. Was it possible that he
had at last found a means by which he could ship lumber to Europe where
it was greatly needed for building and rebuilding and where his agent
could dispose of it at almost any figure--all without the exorbitant
freight rates imposed since the war started and which had not yet been
removed?

“I shall return at three tomorrow, Mr. Bailey, good-day.”

“Good-day.”

Walter stepped briskly into his office, did a little two-step, tossed
his hat in the air, and said, “I have great hopes, Miss Franklin, great
hopes.”

The little typewriter smiled a smile of mingled interest and
apprehension.

“I wish you good luck, Mr. Gary,” she responded.

A full three-quarters of an hour elapsed while Walter waited the
following day in the office of the National Transportation Company.
Had Bailey forgotten his appointment? Had the directors accepted or
rejected his offer? When would they take a consignment? He was thinking
these and other thoughts, as he sat leaning in the chair, turning his
hat around and around in his hands.

“Well, I’ve kept you waiting some time,” said Mr. Bailey, hastily
entering the office.

Walter tried to conceal his anxiety.

“You asked me to come at three, and I like to be on time, although I am
in a bit of a rush.”

“Yes, these are busy times for all of us. This question of feeding
Europe is a perplexing one, aside from business transactions. Food
stuffs must be rushed to the hungry ones at any cost. If you have been
over seas you no doubt know how they need our help.”

“No, I didn’t get over,” replied Walter somewhat dolefully. “I tried
even before our country declared war. I wanted to go over with the
Canadians: after I failed there and the U. S. took it up I tried again,
but they turned me down, too. I have a dislocated shoulder and a broken
knee cap--got them playing football at college; in fact, I was on my
back two months with them. But I thought I was pretty well over it by
this time--only feel it when the weather is bad.”

“Those who wanted to serve and were rejected should have had a badge,
stripe or something to show they were not slackers,” sympathetically
replied Mr. Bailey. “The country rejects the individual for things that
are not his fault, and the world thinks as it pleases.”

“Oh, well, it could have been worse. I did what I could at home
putting Liberty Loans over, buying bonds, and making the soldiers
comfortable in a general way, but none of it compensates for the real
thing.”

“Well, I think I’ve put the lumber deal through for you, although I
had some difficulty doing it. Everybody is suspicious of free goods. I
explained to the directors that your reason for giving the dunnage was
to have it turned over to your London agent for disposal, after the
cargoes were unloaded on the other side. They thought it a very fair
proposition.”

Bailey drew his chair nearer to Walter and smiled encouragingly.

“It will certainly serve both your purpose and mine,” interposed
Walter. “It will save you the expense of buying lumber with which to
pack your wheat, and it will enable me to place quantities of it on the
other side.”

“A clever idea,” repeated Bailey. “Can you have two hundred thousand
feet delivered to me by Thursday?”

“I think so--by rushing like Sam Hill.”

“All right, draw up your contract and get a move on you.”

“I have already prepared it and have it here in my pocket. You see, I
was hoping for the best.”

The contract was signed, and he hurried to break the good news to Miss
Franklin.

“If this plan is successful,” said he, “you shall have a long vacation,
and I--I have promised myself too much already--but if it fails! I
tremble to think of the consequences.”

“Mr. Gary,” asked Miss Franklin, “are you sure there is such a wild
demand for lumber on the other side as you say there is?”

“Yes, quite sure. My doubt lies in the question: Will Proctor be equal
to the occasion! If this lumber is properly handled we should be able
to make a million easily before the time expires.”

“It’s a big undertaking, isn’t it,” she said, astounded at the figure
mentioned.

“Yes, but there is a big stake,” responded Walter, and the little
typist detected a note of sadness in his voice.

He hurried to disclose the good news to his mother, and as he pulled
a chair to her side he patted her joyfully upon the cheeks, “Mother,
perhaps we shall soon be rich,” he said.

“Rich!” repeated Mrs. Gary, softly, yet in a tone of surprise. “I
thought we were doing remarkably well for our bad beginning. Indeed,
I was thinking only yesterday of what a comfortable feeling it was to
have our debts paid and a little money laid away besides?”

“I--I used the money, Mother,” confessed Walter, overcome with a
feeling of remorse. “But I am quite sure to have it back soon, besides
a great deal more. A big opportunity presented itself and I took
advantage of it.” Walter tried to appear more confident than he really
was.

“What?” asked Mrs. Gary, in a voice that indicated alarm. “You have not
used all the money, have you?”

“Yes, I used it on a big deal.”

“Pray, what could such a deal be?” inquired Mrs. Gary, who had been
more than apprehensive of her son’s restlessness of late. As they
talked together she quietly assorted remnants of wool, left from the
many sweaters she had knit; and from her demeanor one could detect at a
glance that she was a woman of composure and experience.

“Usually I prefer to tell you, Mother, before I take a leap, as you
know, but this time I acted upon my own initiative.”

“What have you done?”

Walter related to his mother, in detail, the story of his lumber
transaction. He finished by saying, “You see the National
Transportation Company have contracted to use my lumber for two
years. Of course, I mean to send a good quality, and this will aid in
reconstruction work on the other side and besides give us a big profit.”

“I see,” she responded, and gave her boy an admiring look.

“To carry out the program means sacrifice, and that’s what is worrying
me.”

“The step is taken, so let us hope for the best,” answered Mrs. Gary,
cheerfully. “When do you deliver your first consignment!”

“Thursday, two hundred thousand feet.”

Walter’s mother arose, took her boy’s face gently between her two
hands, and looking steadfastly into his honest, dark eyes, said, “if
you fail you have only done your best. Opportunities rarely present
themselves. It is by the creation of them that men succeed. Half of
success is grit.”

“You are a dear brave ‘sport.’ The next time I shall not be afraid to
consult with you on all my business problems.”

“And I shall try not to retard progress.”

“It gives me more courage to go ahead when I know you are in on the
deal; things seem to turn out better.”

“We all feel that way, dear. The troubles of life diminish when they
are shared by others. Even the greatest becomes smaller when one knows
that others are helping to bear it. It seems selfish, but misery loves
company.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“The cable, has it come yet, Miss Franklin?”

“Not yet.”

Walter seated himself at his desk. There was a far away look in his
face. “It should have been here four days ago. What do you think could
be delaying Proctor?”

“Possibly it is the cable that’s delayed, and not Mr. Proctor. Forget
it, Mr. Gary, then it will be sure to come.”

“How can I forget it when so much depends on that first consignment?
I’ve hardly slept a wink since it was sent.”

“You’ll be a wreck if you keep worrying like this,” rejoined the little
stenographer.

“I’d be all right if I could only hear from Proctor.”

Walter rose nervously from the chair at every turn of the door-knob.
Would the thing never come? Surely, he must take Miss Franklin’s advice
and stop worrying about it. So he bade her close up, and strolled
slowly homeward. He shrank from telling his mother again that he had
had no word from London, for he knew only too well with what effort she
was suppressing her anxiety.

He thought of diverting his course to Betty’s office, but his better
judgment caused him to continue; for he knew that even though Betty
were ready to leave, some admirer would be waiting for her in his car,
and she generally preferred riding to walking.

As he entered the door he heard his mother’s voice softly singing a
familiar tune; it encouraged him.

“Mother,” he called, feigning indifference, “that darn thing hasn’t
come yet.”

“Mr. Proctor appears to be having some difficulty in disposing of the
goods, doesn’t he?”

“I don’t know what to think. Even if there was no market for the
lumber, I should think he would wire.”

“Never mind,” suggested Mrs. Gary. “Don’t cross bridges until you come
to them. Go and see Betty this evening, she will cheer you up a bit.”

“Oh, no, I’ll wait and see if I make a success of this deal first;
because if I lose, it will be good-bye to her anyway.”

“Why good-bye! It will surely make no difference to her if you win or
lose. I shouldn’t think she was that sort of a girl.”

“She’s a fine girl, but she loves money and all it buys.”

“No more than other girls; they all love money.”

“But there is a difference. Take Sarah White for instance, the question
of money isn’t in her make up. She’d as soon marry Jack Evans and keep
her position, if it would help, as not.”

“Yes, I believe she would,” affirmed Mrs. Gary, “but wouldn’t Betty?”

“Never; she wouldn’t marry the best man on earth unless he were rich.”

“Perhaps she has never loved.”

“Mere love of a man will never sway Betty.”

“She has great aspirations--she loves luxuries, and the one who can
supply them will be the one she will take.”

“You do her an injustice. She never impressed me as having such exalted
desires.”

“But I know her so well. Yet with it all my one prayer is to be able to
give her what she desires.”

Mrs. Gary quickly dropped her work in her lap.

“Then you mean you love her, Walter?”

“Yes, I love her, her face is always before me--a vision that refuses
to vanish!”

“I shall try to become better acquainted with her, dear, I had no idea
she played such an important part in your life.”

“She is a hard little trick to know.”

“And feeling as you do, you say you have not spoken to her of your
venture.”

“No, because if I win I shall ask her to marry me. If I lose she shall
never know that I love her.”

Walter stooped, kissed his mother and walked slowly from the room,
closing the door gently behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

“What has become of you anyway!” asked Jack Evans as he appeared in
Walter’s office at lunch time. His entrance had not the slightest
effect, however, upon the attention his friend and the stenographer
were giving to a cable which apparently had just arrived. They did not
raise their eyes from the sheet or give any sign of recognition until
the last word had been read; then Walter waved the paper and said,
“Three cheers!”

“What the dickens is the matter with you?”

“Read it,” returned Walter, thrusting the paper into Jack’s hand for
him to read. “‘Last of shipment disposed of. Good price. Order on hand
for five hundred thousand feet.’ It’s the deal I was telling you of
yesterday.”

“Good work! have you another consignment going out soon?”

“Yes, and every dollar I own and a lot besides is tied up in a yard
full of lumber waiting to be shipped.”

“Lucky dog.”

“I thought I was anything but lucky yesterday, after I had waited a
week without a word from Proctor. Heavens, I thought I would go crazy.
Last night I felt like swimming to England. I cabled him three times
before he answered.”

“Maybe you will play some golf with a fellow now.”

“I am ready for anything. Want to play this afternoon?”

“Sure, at four. Meet me at the club. Oh, say, Betty was asking about
you yesterday; she says she hasn’t seen you for more than a week.”

“What did she say and how did she look when she said it?” laughingly
inquired Walter as they left the office.

“I told you what she said, you chump, and she looked as though she
meant it. Why don’t you quit working on that Bolshevism rot and join us
occasionally at the club.”

“I’ve been anxious about my business and besides Betty seems to be
having a pretty good time without me.”

“Nonsense, why don’t you assert yourself? Women like to be bossed,
you know.” This was said in the tone of a person confident of his own
powers along this line.

“Is that the way you manage Sarah? You surely have no kick coming where
she is concerned.”

“No, she’s a brick, only she works too hard to suit me. Poor kid,
she doesn’t get in from Washington until five; then if she has an
engagement at night, she is all in the next day.”

“The satisfaction of knowing she is doing her bit compensates for that.”

“Yes, and now that the war is over, I’m hoping we’ll all be able to
relax soon. I for one am sick of it all. The sight of a new man to
train simply deadens me.”

“Pshaw, Jack, what are you talking about? Aren’t you proud the Hopkins
students made such a good showing for themselves?”

“Yes, but I’m tired.”

“How many of them got over anyway?”

“About three hundred and eighty in France, and approximately two
hundred in the camps ready for service.”

“Good, they have shown what they are made of, haven’t they!”

“Yes, because many of them are only children.”

“I envy them!” reflectively added Walter.

The two men parted. Jack was tall--at least six feet. He was slender
and straight. He wore a Canadian uniform which showed off his figure to
advantage. He also wore the D. S. C. ribbon, which was the envy of his
men friends who had not seen service, and the glory and pride of all
the girls upon whom he condescended to lavish attentions.

He had been assigned to Baltimore a year before to train college
students for service. He found our clubs open to him, as were also the
homes of our socially prominent families, because he was descended from
a fine old Canadian family whose unimpeachable manners and traditions
marked them unmistakably as of good English stock. These traits were
prominent in Jack, and revealed themselves in his accent and cultured
intonations.

Walter watched him out of sight, wondering why Jack had shown such a
fondness for him, who was so entirely different. He compared Jack’s
graceful figure with his own, which was handicapped by a droop in one
shoulder, and a limp. Often had Walter thought of his imperfections and
promised himself to make up in knowledge what he lacked in form.

“Miss Franklin,” said he, when he returned from lunch, “a little golf
and tennis for me in the afternoons, but no other holiday this summer.
I want you to run off and get rested up, because there will be lots of
work for all of us soon.”

“But you have already worked so hard, Mr. Gary, you ought to take a
rest too.”

“All of my wants are satisfied with this deal going through. It will
not be long now before Gary & Co. will mean more than just a name to
Baltimore.”

       *       *       *       *       *

These days Walter’s whistle sounded through the house like music to his
mother’s ears. He worked late into the night, but when morning came he
was punctual and smiling.

“Love and business must be moving hand in hand with my boy,” remarked
Mrs. Gary at breakfast one morning.

“No, mother, I have seen very little of Betty in the last two months,
but I have had a good many notes from her, and writing was something
she never had time to do before--it indicates she’s thinking of me,
anyway.”

“Possibly she is not working so hard now.”

“Yes, she said she had only been to the club once in the last month,
and you know how she loves to dance. She is sick of filing cards, poor
kid. She is weary of her position. She is much too beautiful to be kept
indoors. She would be able to live in the sunshine. It must be hard
when one’s friends are all able to take life so easily. Of course, the
girls are all working now for the Government, but there’s a difference
between working for patriotism and for a living.”

“Working for a living has its virtues; it’s broadening, and she will
learn things that are not taught at home.”

“But she has that unconquerable yearning for life and its activities.”

“That’s all the better. She will learn to appreciate the advantages
when they come to her, and she probably will never make the mistake
of allowing her life to narrow down to one of domesticity, as so many
young people do. If they could only learn that just as a landscape
without a perspective is flat, so is a young life which has no outside
interests to bring into relief the monotony of its daily tasks! Without
a background of knowledge for comparison the unusual in life is flat
and meaningless.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Betty sat on the edge of her little white bed. It stood in a room
simply furnished, and its whitish cast made a fitting background for
her slight figure clothed in black with a plain white frill at the
neck. Her eyes were slowly following the lines of a letter, which ran:

  “DEAR BETTY:

  “I send you roses to remind you that there is still much that is
  beautiful in the world--flowers and hills and sky, and nearer than
  these, home and family and friends. And there is much work to be
  done, work full worthy of your best, which just now you feel like
  giving to memory only; and there are so many lives to which your life
  may contribute something of what your mother gave to you.

  “It is one of my abiding faiths that life must be forward-looking and
  onward-pressing, not with forgetfulness of those who have gone, but
  with strength and even happiness in the knowledge that we carry on
  their work and that they do not die; that through us, and through our
  children and friends, and all to whom we pass on something of what we
  received from them, they are borne on to everlasting life.

  “For the moment we feel only the great loss--and today I feel as
  if something had gone from my life because so much has gone from
  yours--but sad as the moment is, it should also be one of the
  greatest moments of life; for from it should arise, purified from
  everything earthly, an ideal which may be as a torch to light the
  way. Thus among the most beautiful things still in the world are the
  spirits of those who have gone.

                                                             “With love,
                                                             “WALTER.”

She folded the sheet that carried the consoling message--the only word
that had helped her bear the loss of her mother and chum, whom she
had seen buried but a few days before. She walked to the faded white
roses which had accompanied it and which stood on a table close by. She
touched them gently and then turned to the bed, and throwing herself on
the pillow sobbed softly to herself.

Suddenly someone knocked gently upon the door.

How long had she been there? Rising she caught a glimpse of one very
red cheek as she passed the mirror. She must have slept a long while.

“Why, Aunt Martha, what time can it be?” she inquired of a small kindly
faced woman who stood outside the door.

“Eight-thirty, dear,” her aunt replied, patting her on the arm. “Walter
is waiting down stairs to know if you will see him for a moment.”

“Yes, Marty,” she said, using the pet name to compensate her aunt for
climbing three flights of stairs. “I shall be right down.” She closed
the door, and sat down to think over the problem with which she was
confronted. Her thoughts returned to the subject which occupied her
mind before she fell asleep. She glanced at the letter which had
fallen to the floor--such a message. Only one with a great heart could
put such thoughts into words. There was no doubt in her mind that
some day Walter would be a “big” man. He had already accumulated a
fortune, and his name was on the lips of all her friends. He loved her
devotedly--that she was sure of, and he had been the favorite of her
mother, who had cautioned her to think twice before she rejected him.

“And why shouldn’t I marry him?” she asked herself over and over.
“There is lots in life besides love. If he is willing to take me with
a heart that is just friendly and accept other qualities instead of
love, why shouldn’t I make the deal for myself--just as he made one in
lumber? He received large profits, and so would I. In return he gave
good lumber, and I would supply good material as a wife. He signed a
contract, and so will I.”

She arose, bathed her face in cold water, carelessly twisted her hair
low on her neck, and descended the stairs.

Walter stepped to meet her, she extended her hands, more cordially than
she had ever done before, and he took them in his own. Never had he
been so much in love with her. He gazed into the eyes that were of a
surpassingly beautiful shade of brown. They looked larger than ever
from grief and loss of sleep, and seemed to match the hair which clung
to her forehead with a weblike softness. The nose was not large, but
straight and well formed. The lips were a bit thinner and the mouth a
bit larger than those an artist would choose for a model, but the even
white teeth that had always been her salient attraction compensated for
these deficiencies. These features went to make up a face that was not
indicative of weakness, yet would not impress one as strong.

“I can’t tell you how my heart goes out to you in your sorrow,” he
whispered softly.

“The letter, such a comforting letter,” she answered, tears filling her
eyes. “It helped more than anything.”

“Then it has fulfilled its mission.”

“How sweet of you to send the flowers,” she added.

“It isn’t a fraction of what I should I like to do for you. Betty, if
you only knew how I love you! But there, I didn’t come to worry you
again. My new machine has just come, and I thought you might like a
breath of air.”

“How refreshing it would be,” she answered. And she accepted with her
eyes and turned to pick up a wrap. In fact, Betty was a flirt, and
quite often her eyes said things that her lips did not confirm.

“What a monster in comparison with our little Ford,” said she, as she
sank into the softly cushioned seat beside Walter.

“Do you like it?”

“It’s wonderful.”

“Then I wish it was yours instead of mine.”

“But then it would not be wonderful if you were not here beside me.”

Walter gasped and almost ran into a passing machine. He looked down at
the small figure beside him and asked. “Really--really, Betty, do you
mean what you say?”

And in her heart Betty almost believed herself that she meant it.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a season of reaction. War was over and with spring came the end
of the winter festivities. Betty had derived much benefit from Walter’s
newly acquired fortune. There had been rides, dinners, flowers and
everything dear to the heart of a girl. She found Walter’s attentions
the envy of other girls, and she reveled in the thought that he had
eyes for no one but her--until she accepted his proposal of marriage
and the wedding day was not far distant.

Then she revolted against the affection which she had obtained so
easily, and which required such little effort to hold.

Jack often made the third party, and she found she liked it better when
he was there. About Jack was a vagueness--an air of uncertainty and
superiority that had always attracted her, even though he had paired
off with Sarah.

As for Jack--deep in his heart there was the desire to prove to Betty
that she could not number him among her many suitors. Yet recently he
had been forced to admit that he liked and even sought her company.

It was a day brisk and cool for spring. Betty was in a perverse mood.
She had whipped her dog without just provocation, and she had answered
her aunt shortly several times that morning. The ’phone rang--it was
Walter.

“Do you need me to help open packages?” “Why--no, Walter; there are
only a few, and I’m so frightfully busy with the dressmakers that I
can’t stop just now.”

“When you need me you’ll call me, won’t you, dear?” he asked, in a half
pleading voice.

“Yes, I--I surely shall.”

“This evening, may I come up?”

“I really ought to go to bed early; I’m so tired.”

“Very well,” he answered in a disappointed but conciliatory tone.

Betty slowly hung up the receiver, slipped into a scarlet sweater, and
prepared for a walk in the country. The vivid color contrasted strongly
with the pale cheeks, that had grown whiter and whiter of late. Her
mind dwelt only on one subject. In two days the fatal knot would be
tied--would she able to live up to the bargain? Could she give full pay
for value received? Walter, she knew, was the embodiment of gentleness
and would make a good husband, but she craved for someone whom she
must strive to win, and then plan to hold; neither had been necessary
here. She had won him without competition, and now he was wholly at her
command. “If only he were more elusive,” she thought, “if only he went
to places and did a few things without me.”

“I miss the office dreadfully, Marty,” said she between yawns.

“You always wanted to be out of it when you were there,” answered her
aunt in a tone of surprise.

“The work was drudgery, simply because filing cards required no brains.
It was only repetition, but it was something to do.”

“It will not be long that you will wish for something to do. Soon there
will be work, work and more work.”

“How can one work without an incentive?”

“An incentive! What more of an incentive could you and Walter wish
than each other? You must conjure him to climb rung by rung to the top
of the ladder, and that can be done only by setting a good example.
A wife can lead her husband in paths that are good or bad. A man is
more pliant than a woman, more susceptible to influence; therefore,
she leads and he follows. One must be careful not to leave the other
behind. Bear and forbear, and pull together.”

“Walter is entirely too easily led,” said Betty musingly.

“That’s only because he loves you,” said her aunt in absolute surprise,
“and without the charms that were given you by God, you never could
have won him. And remember, the seeds of love must be sown very deeply
now, in order to hold him when your charms have failed. Beauty doesn’t
last forever, and age makes furrows in women’s faces much quicker than
in those of men. Men are out in the world where a variety of people and
circumstances tends to keep them young; their minds are diverted, and
they have no time for worry over petty annoyances, while women’s minds
become stagnant from the repetition of a daily routine. Their lives
are confined within a narrow periphery, and there are only a few who
enlarge the circle by wandering forth.”

Betty hurriedly made preparations to be gone.

“Why will you not see Walter this afternoon when he wants so much to
see you?”

“I just want to be alone,” flung back Betty as she closed the door, but
she had walked only a short distance when on turning the corner, she
ran full into Jack. Always immaculately dressed, he wore the nonchalant
air of a person who was confident that his appearance was an asset.

“And where is Walt this fine afternoon?” he asked, manifesting his
pleasure at the chance meeting.

“He ’phoned a while ago, but I have to go to the dressmaker.”

“Are you going to be there long?”

“Not so very.”

“May I wait and will you take a walk with me? It’s just the kind of a
day for a walk.”

“I think I should love to,” she answered. And within she was conscious
of both happiness and guilt.

She made haste and it was not long before she was back, sauntering
slowly by Jack’s side, and keeping in step without effort.

“Betty, do you know you walk like a boy, and don’t we step nicely
together?” Jack asked her, leaning down to peep into her eyes under the
broad hat. “I’ve always heard that people who keep step uniformly are
well matched,” he continued.

“I believe I can keep step with most anyone,” she answered, catching
the significance of his words.

“But not so nicely as with me, I’m confident,” he replied.

“Don’t you hate to see the trees lose their leaves?” asked Betty to
turn the subject, as she would divert a naughty child from something
that exasperated it. “It is always such a sad season to me,” she
continued.

“Fall isn’t always a sad season, but this one is especially so,” said
Jack wickedly, “because the trees are losing their leaves and so am I
losing my little friend.”

“Will I be lost, just because I’m married?”

“In a way.”

“Oh no, you must come to see us even more often than you come now, and
bring Sarah with you. By the way, where is Sarah? She has not been
around for a week?”

“Indeed I don’t know,” was the indifferent reply, and this very
attitude of indifference particularly pleased Betty. She resolved
somewhere within her (if she could keep Walter from finding it out), to
hold Jack’s admiration at all costs.

They walked, chatted and laughed away the time until darkness
completely overtook them. Walter did not hear of the little escapade;
and if he had he was by nature too gentle, kind and unsuspecting to
have thought long or hard of it.

After the wedding the young pair settled down in a lovely old colonial
home, which spread itself against a hill in a rambling fashion. It was
made conspicuous and inviting by a new coat of paint. Their choice had
fallen upon this house, because of Betty’s admiration of its finely
detailed mantels, the broad stair, the quaint colonial windows, the
box-wood garden, and the rustic spring house, with the little stream
bordered by a row of weeping willows, whose boughs drooped so low that
they seemed to be replenishing the brook with their tears.

Here Betty learned to know Walter. He taught her to love the
out-of-doors. He patiently labored to teach her the correct strokes
in golf and tennis, although he himself was handicapped in his
participation in these games. In the evenings he tried to pick up the
threads of his and her neglected education--he sought diligently to
teach her to love the best in literature. And taking his life as a
whole it centered about this little creature whom God had made too
perfect in form and face.

Betty was fascinated and even entertained by the atmosphere of this new
environment while it was new, but in the course of time she began to
long for a change--adventure, and admiration for the world at large.

About two years after the marriage Jack paid one of his visits to the
Garys. It was springtime, and the air was filled with the beauty of the
season. Romance with her transforming wand had already touched Betty,
and thoughts of Jack never failed to quicken her pulse.

It was his fourth or fifth visit since Christmas; and each time Walter
and Betty had welcomed him wholeheartedly.

Jack had risen early this morning prepared to take a long walk, and
had been served a cup of hot coffee before starting. He was, as usual,
perfectly dressed. One could not call him vain; yet he had an inherent
desire to appear handsomer, more learned, and more of an athlete, in
the company of Betty than he really was.

Going down the drive he heard a happy peal of laughter. It was
childish, yet more mellow and appealing in its ring. Looking around
Jack perceived the slight figure of Betty perched high in a tree. She
was climbing higher with the agility of a squirrel, stepping from limb
to limb and frolicking among the branches like a young animal, that had
not yet been burdened with the care of gathering food or preparing for
winter shelter. On limbs lower down were two small boys of about eight
and ten, children of the overseer. They had already become Betty’s
playmates, and were making a desperate effort not to be outdone by her.
Jack gave a long low whistle. Betty clung closer to the trunk of the
tree and then peeped out, disclosing to view one eye and a part of her
dishevelled hair. In answer to the whistle she encircled her mouth with
her hand and called, “It’s too early for anyone to be up yet.”

“May I climb up there?” called back Jack softly.

“No, I’m all disarranged.”

“Please let me,” he pleaded.

“I’m coming down this minute,” answered Betty, lowering herself to the
ground.

“Will you walk a little with me?” asked Jack, bound not to lose her for
the two long hours before the morning meal.

“I’m only in bloomers,” answered Betty still protecting herself from
view.

“They are all the better for walking--come with me, the air is
wonderful.”

“Come along then.”

In less than a minute Jack was by her side. “How adorable,” he
remarked, as he caught his breath and surveyed the small figure before
him attired in a middy blouse, bloomers and sneakers.

“Is it bad for me to walk with you so early without Walter,” she asked
slyly, pretending not to know.

“Why what’s bad about it? It isn’t premeditated, and I’m not going to
abduct you.”

“Abduct me,” repeated Betty, “I never thought of such a thing.”

“But I have,” Jack replied, complacently. “I’d steal you this very
second, if I dared.”

“If you talk like that, Jack, I shall not stay with you.”

Jack’s persistence in making intimate and affectionate remarks served
apparently to discompose Betty at times, although more than once she
was conscious of having feigned annoyance. But now she turned quickly
and started toward the house. Jack leaped forward and caught her by the
wrist.

“Don’t be prudish,” he pleaded.

“But you say such disrespectful things to me,” pouted Betty.

“I didn’t mean to; please forgive me.”

Betty yielded and they started off again over the hills at a brisk pace.

“Let’s run a race,” suggested Betty.

“All right, we’ll start at the foot of the hill, and race to the second
big tree.”

“May I have a handicap?” asked Betty.

“Yes, to the little rock just there,” said Jack, pointing to a stone a
few feet away.

“Oh, that isn’t enough,” grumbled Betty.

“It’s all you can have,” answered Jack in his usual decided manner.
“Don’t start until I say three. One--two--three.”

They were off. Betty sprang up the hill like a deer. Jack gradually
overtook her, but when she heard him gaining on her, she summoned all
of her remaining strength and fairly leapt over the ground. Jack pulled
ahead and won by only a few paces--and he had done his best. She backed
to the tree for support while Jack threw himself to the ground.

“Ah, you’re all out of breath.”

“Not a bit of it,” answered Jack, jumping to his feet. “Why are--are
you using the tree for a prop?”

“But I didn’t fall down and I’m not out of breath.”

Jack moved to her side, drew her arm through his, and said, “Come on,
little boy, you did very well, and I love you against that tree.”

“I believe I shall stay by the tree,” she added wickedly, glancing into
Jack’s face to see if he caught the significance of her words.

Quick as a flash he answered, “The tree isn’t necessary. It is the same
anywhere.”

A flash of deep scarlet rose to Betty’s cheeks, as she realized that,
for the first time in her acquaintance with Jack, she had deliberately
invited his advances. And though a feeling of joy surged through her
being at the thought of it, she was conscious of a deep sense of shame
on realizing that she, who had always esteemed herself above such
practices, had not only allowed another than her husband to make open
advances to her, but had even encouraged him to do so.

“Please will you tell me the time?” she asked, with eyes averted.

“Just ten minutes after eight.”

“We must be hurrying along,” she said, quickening her step, “breakfast
will be served, and besides we’re very bad.”

“Bad,” repeated Jack, “why bad?”

“Because it is bad for us to be speaking this way to each other--I’m
deceiving Walter--I didn’t mean to say what I said.”

“But I meant what I said,” replied Jack, in his habitual positive tone,
“and what’s more I can’t help it. Love is the only thing in life that
can’t be regulated. It comes and goes unbidden. To work or to be idle,
to be kind-hearted or cruel, to accustom ourselves to outdoor or indoor
lives is ours to decree, but to love or not to love is beyond the power
of any human being, and right at this moment I am loving you more than
I ever loved any one in all my life.

“What causes this great love,” he continued philosophically, “I am at
a loss to know. Candidly I should much prefer to love Sarah, because I
believe she loves me, and besides she is not encumbered with a husband.”

“Walter is not an inc----.”

“Tell me honestly, Betty dear,” interrupted Jack, “do you want me to
love you, or must I go away?”

“I think you must go away.” But she wished he would not take her at her
word.

“When?”

“I--I don’t know,” she stammered, restraining her tears.

“But you care, don’t you? Admit it, do admit it. Admit it so that I can
go back to my work and accomplish something.” He had not yet felt the
sting of a troubled conscience, nor did he realize that the inconstancy
of his friend was drawing a cloud around her life that might never be
cleared away.

Betty stepped closer to the man, who had so dominated her will. She
looked straight into his compelling eyes, and the words which she
wanted to say failed her. She felt that she could not see him go from
her, yet she knew that there was no comparison between him and her
husband; that her husband possessed all the qualities of a strong and
good man that the other man lacked.

Walter sat reading the morning paper. Jack paced slowly up and down on
the veranda. The family gathered for breakfast. Betty appeared in a
fresh yellow muslin, relieved by a snow white collar and sash. As she
descended the stairs Walter laid aside the paper.

“Aren’t you going to church, dear?” he asked. “I thought you would be
ready by this time.”

“Can we leave Jack?” her heart jumping at the mere mention of his name.

“Make him go along,” responded Walter.

“He doesn’t like church; and especially on a day like this, I am sure
he would rather be out of doors.”

“Oh, well there is lots for him to do--ride, play golf, anything he
likes. We’ll be gone but a short time.”

“Can’t we worship in the open today? It’s so wonderful out-of-doors.”

“It is wonderful,” replied Walter, drawing out Betty’s chair for her,
“and it does seem hard to shut one’s self up on a day like this. But
there is no getting around it--there are certain duties we owe to the
Creator of these wonderful days, and there is only one day in the week
on which we can openly pay them. If I evade them I am conscious all the
week of having neglected my duty. It’s all right, dear, to say let’s
worship in the open, but we just don’t do it. Once off, that’s the end
of it.”

“Oh, come, Walt, don’t make me feel like a heathen,” interposed Jack.
“I don’t mind going to church, but it’s the everlasting long sermons we
are subjected to, that I dislike.”

“I admit it isn’t the sermon that attracts me; I go simply to offer my
thanks, and--and to worship in a way, although I must confess that it
is the whole service that does me good--the sermon, the hymns and the
prayers. It’s like taking a shower on a hot day.”

“It is indeed,” remarked Aunt Marty. “I can tell you children from
experience, that material things do not satisfy when one is nearing the
end of life. It’s the good we’ve done and the trust we’ve had on the
journey, and it is that worship that Walter speaks of that stimulates
and inspires us to do the good and have the trust.”

“How about driving in to hear Dr. Burk this morning? He isn’t afraid of
the truth, and will tell us something worth listening to, I am sure.
Jack, you’ll like him; come along, and we’ll have golf right after
dinner.”

“I’ll play you some golf, but I am going to renig on the church
proposition. I’ve strayed too far from the fold to be gathered into it
now. May I borrow Delphie and go for a ride?”

“Sure, I’ll have Frank saddle her for you,” answered Walter.

The meal was finished; Aunt Marty left hastily to make ready for
church. Betty lingered in the conservatory rearranging a few stray
ferns.

“Dear, are you going?”

“Have I time to dress? It’s so late already.”

“Well, leave the plants alone and hurry.”

“Walter dear, if you don’t mind I think I shall stay at home. There are
lots of little things I want to do and when they are finished perhaps
I’ll ride a little with Jack.”

“No, don’t let me keep you home,” interposed Jack, trying to appear
disconcerted at Betty’s indecision.

“As you like, dear,” answered Walter, “only be careful with Ringgold,
she is as wild as a hare--she hasn’t had exercise lately.”

“You are sure you won’t mind?” asked Betty pleadingly, as she steadily
looked into Walter’s eyes, for she knew his power of observance and
his ability intuitively to arrive at conclusions which were often
startlingly correct.

“I’m satisfied if you are,” he answered.

Betty was conscious of a feeling of guilt as she watched the two men go
down the room side by side--Walter, a bit stooped, bald and slightly
limping, Jack, tall, straight, thin, with a mass of dark hair. Her
cheeks burned as she thought of her subterfuge, and felt herself
drifting into deception.

“I’ll take good care of the little lady, Walt,” Jack was saying, as the
car whisked away.

Jack lingered about on the veranda; Betty disappeared and did not
return until she heard the low, long, familiar whistle come from the
foot of the stairs. At that moment she appeared on the landing.

“Do come and talk to me, little boy?” begged Jack in a soft, loving
tone.

“I’m sorry I didn’t go to church,” answered Betty regretfully, as she
slowly descended to the lower step. This brought her head to a level
with Jack’s shoulder.

“Did you stay for my sake? Don’t be stingy--say yes,” he coaxed.

“No--no indeed, there was lots to be done here.”

She stepped back up the stairs, half disgusted at both her own and
Jack’s actions. She tried not to be one of those helpless girls who
unconsciously betray themselves, and whose behavior is controlled
solely by their impulses. She could not comprehend in what manner
she had become apathetic toward Walter--Walter who was so tender,
thoughtful, and true to her. She would have expressed the utmost
surprise and disapprobation if she had heard that another had been
detected in this immodest affair--if indeed, she had believed it
possible.

“I stayed because I did not like to leave my guest alone, and because I
really had things to do.”

“But I am vain enough to think that had I not been here the ‘things to
do’ would have remained as they were.”

As Jack made this assertion he drew Betty gently back to him and
pressed his lips to the top of her head. She stood as if held by a vice.

“Please--please, Jack, won’t you help me to be good? I owe so much to
Walter.”

“Money is money, my little boy, but there is no such thing as a love
debt. We know not where love goes or whence it comes. We only know that
it has come to you--and to me. It has caught us as fish are caught in a
net, and I can think of no escape.”

“But we must do something. Can’t we pray for guidance?”

“No--I can only pray that in some way I shall soon be able to make you
mine.”

Again he kissed the top of her head, and as she turned to resist him,
he folded her slowly but closely into his arms. She yielded--their lips
met, every nerve and fibre tense in the two young bodies.

“You were mine in heaven, darling, long before you came to earth. I
lost you--and all these years I’ve been searching for you; now I’ve
found you, never, never to let you go--mine--you must be mine.”

“Oh, Jack, how can I ever look at Walter again?” sobbed Betty, tearing
herself away. “I can never make my peace with God and him,” she said
brokenly. “I shall always be afraid in the day lest my actions betray
my guilt, and at night I shall be afraid to sleep for fear some
self-accusing word may escape my lips.”

“It would be cruel for me to subject you to such misery,” said Jack,
leading her to a comfortable couch, which stood before a large open
fire. “Come with me--come until we can arrange to be each other’s?”

“Leave--leave Walter?” she asked, as if half dazed. The words seemed
crude--unreal, if she had suddenly awakened from a dream whose content
was even now vague and fast fading into the subconscious.

“Come, darling, we’ll solve it later,” said Jack, holding her closer in
his arms. “My little boy is so frightened now.”

His words and movements indicated possession. She was now the ruling
passion of his life----.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was with great trepidation that Betty awaited the return of Walter;
she still had time to rectify her wrongdoing and send Jack away
forever. This action was in her power and she was fully conscious of
its importance. And her chief thought was of the sorrow she was about
to bring upon the man who had been father, husband and brother all in
one--who had lived but to please her; surely she was listening to the
mad promptings of a wild impulse. Then she strove to persuade herself
that Walter was phlegmatic and plain, a person whose goodness consisted
rather in the avoidance than the overcoming of temptation.

“Direct me, God, to the right choice,” said she aloud.

Jack held her at arm’s length and austerely scanned her features.

“Dearest, you know you love me--the joy of this hour is proof enough:
these thrills are the thrills of love; the first that have ever come
to you or to me. Come, dear, come with me. Do not leave my soul in
anguish--my heart famished. Darling, come and I shall protect you
always. Answer, my own--answer yes,” whispered Jack, as his lips
repeatedly pressed warm kisses to hers--and the answer came slowly and
softly--“Yes, I’ll come.”

“When? Now?”

“No, I must make it easy for Walter first. I must arrange things and it
will take a long while.”

“I’ll be waiting for you, sweetheart, and even if my body be exiled
from you forever my heart will still be yours.”

       *       *       *       *       *

An epidemic of “flu” had spread over the country--multitudes were sick
and dying. Many of the doctors had not returned from the war and the
few left were inadequate in numbers to cope with the dreaded malady.

Dr. Baker looked up at his wife from the couch where he had fallen from
exhaustion.

“Dear,” said she, “there is another desperate case in the Valley. Do
you think you can possibly go out tonight? They are waiting at the
’phone for your answer.”

“Tonight! Not possible, Jane, I’m so tired I can scarcely walk another
step. Tell them to try Johnson; they will just about catch him. Who is
ill?” he asked, as his wife was leaving the room.

“Mr. Gary--Walter Gary.”

“Walter Gary?” repeated Dr. Baker, sitting upright.

“Yes.”

“Ask how long he has been ill.”

Mrs. Baker returned almost immediately. “It’s Mrs. Gary at the ’phone;
she is begging you to come. She says her husband has just been taken,
but he seems desperately ill.”

The doctor pulled himself to his feet.

“He’s just about the age and the build of the ones who go quickest.”

“Mrs. Gary said she would send for you at once if you would come,”
continued his wife.

“Never mind, tell her I’ll be there as soon as I can make it.”

It was the latter part of the following week. Dr. Baker entered his
home at midnight as noiselessly as possible, but his wife was waiting
for him and accosted him from the top of the stairs.

“Is he better, Dick?”

“No, Jane, I’m afraid we’re going to lose him after all. I came home
only to snatch a wink of sleep and shall be returning directly.”

“And you really think he is going to die?” asked Mrs. Baker, as she
took her husband’s bag from him.

“It looks that way,” answered the Doctor, resignedly. He had become
more or less callous to sickness and death, but this case, as he
described it, was a very appealing one. He regarded young Gary as the
combination of all that went to make a fine citizen, husband, and son,
and to be cut down when he hadn’t well begun to live was more than he
could understand.

“Perhaps he’ll pull through yet,” said Mrs. Baker, but the doctor only
shook his head as he wearily stretched himself out on his bed for a
short rest.

When he entered the sick room the next morning the blinds were drawn
low to keep out the glare of the bright morning sun. Two figures in
white moved noiselessly about the room. He seated himself beside the
bed and gravely regarded his patient. There were two tanks of oxygen,
basins, towels, and a few dishes here and there, and fumes of a
disinfectant were plainly detectable as one crossed the threshold. All
went to make up an atmosphere wherein a very ill or dying patient lay.

Betty stood opposite the doctor, her eyes sunken and her face white
and drawn; with one hand she held pitifully to Walter, while the other
clutched convulsively at her throat.

“Dr. Baker, do something more--for God’s sake do something for him,”
she pleaded, “Walter--Walter,” she called softly, but earnestly. Then
she threw back her head in despair and prayed ardently to God to save
her husband.

“Save him, dear God. Do as you will with me, but save him.” She ended
in a husky voice.

The realization of her profound love for her husband thrust itself upon
her very forcibly in these hours when his life hung by a thread.

“All has been done that human hands can do, dear girl,” spoke the
doctor quietly beside her.

Walter slowly opened his eyes and said,
“Baby--I’ll--be--waiting--for--you.” The breath came in short, quick
gasps and the eyes closed for the last time. Betty called and called,
but no answer came--the voice was hushed forever.

An hour later they carried her limp form from the room. On regaining
consciousness she sat up in bed and called again, “Walter--I want to go
back with Walter.”

“But you musn’t, Mrs. Gary,” soothingly spoke the nurse at her side.
“You can’t do him any good, and you must not jeopardize your own life
more than you already have.”

“I--I--want to go,” groaned Betty. “They will take him from me soon,
forever. Oh, my darling, my darling.”

“Rest awhile, you’ve been through so much,” pleaded the nurse. “Think,
dear, don’t you want to help rid the community of this dreadful
disease? It’s spreading so wildly that we must all do our part to
eliminate it.”

“No--no,” sobbed Betty, “I only want to go with him--with him--with
him----.”

Two months passed. Betty, pale, thin and worn by sickness and grief,
walked arm in arm with Aunt Martha through the paths of the old
fashioned garden. One glimpse of the grief-stricken girl would leave
in the mind a picture one could never forget. The large eyes looked
out from depths much deeper than ever before; the ashy pale cheeks
made a startling contrast to the dark eyes. The figure was thin almost
to emaciation and the dress was simple and black. The mischievous
expression was replaced by one of listlessness and altogether she
looked like one who had but a slender hold on life.

“Marty, do you think Dr. Baker would allow me to ride Walter’s horse
alone?”

“Not today, you’re not strong enough yet. I wrote Jack that you might
be well enough to see him today. He is coming out on the early train.”

“I wish I didn’t have to.”

“He’ll cheer you up, dear. I’ve been looking forward to his visit.
Walter liked him and you’ve put him off so often. Now let him come.”

“I would rather not see anyone,” responded Betty, her eyes filling with
tears.

“But Jack has been so thoughtful--see him for me. You’ll feel better
for having had a little company.”

Slow steps sounded on the gravel path. Betty darted a look like a
frightened deer in the direction from which they came. Jack approached
them between an aisle of poplars.

“Have I caught you unawares?” he asked jocularly, and his face showed
plainly that he was startled at the changed appearance of Betty.

“Oh no,” answered Aunt Marty, “my girl has just been asking for a
horse-back ride.”

“I wanted to ride Walter’s horse alone for a little while,” interposed
Betty sadly.

“You are not strong enough to do that,” said Jack.

“But I’d like to.”

“Take care of her, Jack,” said Aunt Marty, indicating a seat at the
far end of the garden. “I must go and see about my chickens--two of my
prettiest white ones were killed by a train.”

“Mrs. Ames,” Jack called laughingly after her, “can’t you train
chickens better than to have them stand on a railroad track?”

The figure of the patient little old lady disappeared among box woods.

“She didn’t hear me,” he added, turning to Betty.

“She has three hundred and they all seem to know her,” answered Betty,
relieved for the moment to find something impersonal to talk of. “Would
you like to see the new puppies? There are five of them, Frank says. I
haven’t seen them myself yet.”

“No, dear girl. I want to see you and you only. Why have you avoided
me, when you know my heart has been aching so badly? and that I love
you so deeply?”

Betty rose slowly from the bench, waved Jack away with her hand, and
was about to leave him. “Please, will you never, never breathe a
word--of--love to me again,” she asked.

“What?”--asked Jack, “were you only playing with me, Betty?”

“No--before God, I knew not what I did or said.”

“Come, come, my little girl, you are weak and faint--I’m a brute to
worry you. Let’s be friends now and sweethearts later.”

Betty shuddered at the mention of the word.

“No,” she answered, shaking with emotion--“never have I been your
sweetheart, and my grief is that I never realized how truly I did love
Walter. He was ever present, dependable, and true. I felt that I could
put out my hand in the dark and he was always there to guide and help
me, yet I shunned that hand, and deliberately planned to ruin him--to
ruin him--just as if I had been his worst enemy. The things one is
sure of are the things one casts aside, and I, like a venturesome
child, reached for those that were forbidden.”

As she talked her breath came more evenly; the stricture around her
heart relaxed, she leant back in the garden seat, as she felt her
throat tighten and tears rising to her eyes. She could not keep them
back; she was not strong enough. They fell and fell, and from time to
time she brushed them away with her handkerchief.

“Then you’ve stopped--loving me--my little boy has stopped loving me,”
Jack repeated mechanically.

“It was only an ephemeral love--can you forget it and me?” she
asked, gently touching his arm. Like the balmy air of spring was the
gentleness of her presence beside him, and, unrelenting as she was, it
was enough that she was there.

“And you’ll never be mine?” Jack added, turning again to look into the
eyes that held the world for him.

“No--I am married. My husband is dead, but I am married and always
shall be. I was not true to him while I had him for my own, but the
veil is lifted from my eyes and until we see each other again I am his.
For God knows that I loved him.”

At these words a peaceful expression settled upon the pale face, and
Jack saw and realized that whatever of shallowness her nature had
contained had been consumed in the flame of her tragedy. The real
Betty was before him, showing the honesty, the nobility, of her true
spirit--depth had taken the place of shallowness. She had lost and
suffered and this made her still dearer to him, and sacred. He felt the
urgings of his better nature bidding him to forget self in the presence
of this sorrowing woman. And he saw that his love could not be--that
his relationship to her henceforth would have to be on a more unselfish
plane.

They slowly retraced their steps through the aisle of poplars.

“May I still be to you what Walter should have liked me to be?” asked
Jack tenderly, and the answer came distinctly, “Yes, his friend and
mine.”




                           “THE WHITE PETAL”


There never lived another man so utterly unreliable as Albert Wilbur.
If he promised to be at a certain place at a certain time one could
count definitely on his absence. But I never thought he would overlook
an appointment as important as that which he had made to meet me at his
country house on the night of August 3, 1919.

The two Wilbur boys--John and his adopted brother, Albert--were from
childhood my most intimate friends, and I often found it necessary to
help Albert out of serious difficulties.

As a boy he was exceptionally handsome and promising, but the vices
to which he succumbed in later years not only robbed him of his good
qualities, but also brought upon his friends lasting sorrow; for when
I last saw him his indulgence in depravities had nearly approached a
continuous performance.

John, my real chum, was the embodiment of manhood--the only thing I had
against him was that he married my childhood sweetheart. Her name was
Ellen. My love for her was real, it was deep, and it was earnest. Let
me say it was no passing fancy, for there had never been anything to
approach it until now. However, I was not blind to John’s qualities,
and was compelled to admit to myself on more than one occasion that in
selecting a husband Ellen had only shown her usual good judgment.

Since this catastrophe in my life I had retired into myself, determined
to live a life of single blessedness. I resolved to consign to oblivion
this period of my existence--existence I say, because this word most
nearly describes my life at this time. I first tried hard work as
a means to aid me in my purpose. This helped, but did not entirely
fulfill the essentials. I discovered that what I needed was a change,
a new environment: so I pulled up stakes, hard as it was to leave my
three friends--for their little girl was just eleven, and had become
my closest companion--and spent the next seven years roaming about
the world, finding my pleasures in nature, books, new scenes and old
cathedrals.

I had heard regularly from the Wilburs since my departure, but my
sudden return was due to the last letter--it was written by a friend of
the family. She informed me of a fatal automobile accident in which
both John and Ellen had lost their lives. In sequence to this was a
telegram from Albert. On my arrival in New York more letters from him
awaited me. It was at least a week, however, before I started South for
my ultimate destination. I gathered all my belongings--for something
told me I would not soon return--and prepared for a rapid departure.

The night was cold for mid-summer, and I remember distinctly how I drew
my raincoat about me as I walked from the gate across the lawn to where
a dim light glowed through the trees. I had dismissed the carriage
which had brought me from the lonely station, as our business was of a
somewhat secret nature, and so much had been exchanged between us in
regard to it that I counted on finding my friend waiting. As I brushed
through the mist-laden shrubbery, I thought how welcome would be the
grasp of his hand after so many years of separation, and how quickly
the warmth of his presence would dispel the strange uncanny loneliness
which had crept upon me during my long ride through the woods, with
never a sound except the gentle patter of water dropping from the trees
and the slop--slop of the horse’s hoofs in the mud of the road.

So I was more than annoyed, in fact, I was hurt and disgusted when the
decrepit old fellow who had always been a part of the Wilbur household
informed me that “Mister Albert” had wired that he would not be there
until the morning. “Very sorry,” the wire ran, “impossible to keep
appointment with Constable. Make him comfortable for night. Will be
on in morning. ‘For Constable: Do forgive me, old fellow, and make
yourself at home. You have the place to yourself. Guarantee no ghosts.’”

“Small comfort,” I murmured to myself, not being able to repress a
sneer--the note was so characteristic of its author.

“Very good, sir,” said the spectre beside me, whose presence I had
almost forgotten. “I have moved your bed into the library here, where
there is an open fire. You’ll find whiskey and soda right on the table,
and I’ll put your bag close by the bed. Anything else you’d like, sir?”

“No thanks, Watkins,” I said, recovering the old fellow’s name from
some recess in my memory. “I shall do very well, no doubt. But I’m
disappointed.”

“Yes, sir, yes, sir,” and with these words Watkins disappeared.

“I’ll be damned,” I muttered. “This is getting positively spooky.”

I looked down--a big mastiff pup, overgrown and generally loppy in
appearance, evidently thinking himself addressed, arose slowly from the
hearth rug and came towards me, wagging the entire rear end of his body
in a gesture which seemed exaggerated at the time, though I have no
doubt now that even that did not convey the real extent of his pleasure
in having company.

“Well, old man,” I said, stroking his head, “it doesn’t seem so bad
here, after all. Here’s looking at you,” and I sipped the glass of
warming spirits that Watkins had poured for me. After the last drop
had been swallowed I seemed to remember that Watkins had cast some
apprehensive glances at this very glass before he left the room.

“Nonsense,” said I to myself, “it’s all imagination,” and I continued,
“with a good fire, a good drink, and a good book, what more does man
want, unless it be a dog? That’s where you come in, old chap,” and
I reached down and patted him. “Let’s see what there is to read,” I
continued, still addressing the dog for the sake of company.

Albert had one peculiar trait; he always took an austere pride
in being a man of few books, and those such as no one else could
understand. So I found little help in the scattered but much-thumbed
volumes lying in odd corners about the room. Psychology, metaphysics,
and a few seventeenth century works on alchemy made up the entire
collection.

I was beginning to feel sleepy, so I chose the book with the largest
print, and sat down before the blazing fire to while away the hours
until slumber overtook me.

The inevitable happened: I fell asleep in about five minutes.

I awoke with a feeling of suffocation. The clock on the mantle was
chiming twelve, and I counted the strokes, which seemed to be a
continuation of something I had been dreaming. Ten, eleven, twelve,
I said aloud dreamily, like a child repeating a lesson. And then a
strange thing happened. The clock struck, most distinctly, thirteen,
and with a whirring sound stopped dead, the second hand resting exactly
in line with the hands of the dial, which pointed to midnight.

“Are we asleep or awake, old man?” I again addressed the dog, trying
to pass the thing off as a joke, and stretched out my hand to pat his
head. A low growl startled me. The pup was standing erect, every
muscle tense, his ears cocked forward, and the hair on the back of
his neck bristling. The growl continued for a moment; then a change
gradually came over him. The growls became a kind of pitiful whine,
his head fell with drooping ears, his tail dropped between his legs,
and trembling in every limb he crept to my feet and reached his nose
up between my knees, while in his poor dumb eyes, pleading with me as
only a dog’s eyes can plead, were registered the terror that I suddenly
realized I was sharing with him. Strange unspoken communion of man and
beast.

At that moment the seeming impenetrable silence of the night was rent,
like a flash of lightning across a pitch-black sky, by a woman’s
shriek. No, not a shriek, but a wail, a piercing appeal that nothing
could describe. It had all the lure of the Lorelei and the despair
of the Siren spurned, and yet all the sweet timbre of a child’s
instinctive call to a sleeping mother. Then silence, the absolute and
unbounded silence of the grave.

Quivering in every nerve, scarcely able to stand as it seemed at the
time, yet impelled by some unknown force, I found myself running
through strange passages, wrestling with the darkness, on and on,
guided I know not how straight to her whose appeal had come to me--to
me of all the people in the world--this night of August 3, sharp on
the stroke of--thirteen! Then I was battling with some unknown, unseen
opponent, lunging forward wildly, whirling, heaving; and finally with a
terrific wrench, which exhausted the last ounce of strength in my body,
I threw off my foe, threw him off with such force that he seemed to be
shattered in the darkness beyond, and the air that I drew into my lungs
in gasping gulps was pure of the evil of his breath.

Silence again, as I stood leaning against the balustrade trying to
regain my senses. What had happened; was it all a bad dream? Then
slowly I became conscious of a weight against my knees, of two clinging
arms about my waist, of a sweet perfume like that of an old-fashioned
garden in the dewy twilight; and a soft childlike voice was saying:

“O, please, what is it; what has happened, oh, please----”

The soft voice trailed off into a sob, and the arms tightened about
me. I reached down and picked her up, a clinging trembling little
form, its gentle curves rounding into womanhood. How she clung to
me, poor frightened little soul, her arms tight about me and her cold
little face buried against my neck. Then, as I made my way back to the
library, she rested quietly, like a white petal blown from the garden
and storm-tossed, but at last at peace. I could feel her warm tears
and the fresh moist little spot that was her mouth. She seemed to be
murmuring something; or did her lips move gently in a kiss?

I slowly regained my senses, which seemed to be numbed and deadened
but a short time before. My body felt as though pins and needles were
sticking me. My breath came more evenly. I held her lithe, supple
little form at arm’s length and scanned the features carefully. I
could not believe my eyes--was it little Ellen? Could it really be?
Yes, the features were almost the exact reproduction of her mother’s.
The straight nose, the well formed lips and the appealing grey eyes,
fringed with straight, long lashes--all of these I took in at a glance.
I was still too weak to drag ourselves far from the assailant, but her
weak little voice whispered, “Run, Don Compie! Run!” The frightened
look in her eyes and the commanding appeal of the words served to
restore my senses.

Was it a blow from the opponent that had deadened me or was it the
whiskey and soda that had done the trick? It was the dose, because I
remembered with what difficulty I aroused myself from the drowsy sleep
that was about to overtake me. I held Ellen closer to me and made off
as fast as my clumsy feet would move. We were well into the cold woods,
through which I had ridden but a few hours before, when she said, “I
can walk now, please put me down.” I slid her gently to her feet, she
slipped her hand into mine, and we fled as though savages were pursuing
us. As we ran she murmured between breaths, “Watkins told me he had
seen Uncle Albert put something in the whiskey that was on the table.
I was trying to reach you when he seized me. He has kept me a prisoner
since I refused to marry him. Today is my birthday and the day you were
to become my guardian.”

“Yes,” I answered, “but he wrote me you had disappeared--had eloped,
been kidnapped or something.”

“It wasn’t true--I’ll tell you all about it when we are safe--safe and
far from this dreadful place.”

We traveled hours before we were on the highway. The damp but
invigorating air had restored me and the child seemed possessed of
unusual endurance. I espied in the distance a small farm house. A light
was shining through a window on the side. The thought came to me that,
although it was still dark, perhaps they were preparing breakfast.
“Ellen,” I said, “before we go further we must have something to eat.”

“Bread and milk will do,” she answered.

“Let us inquire here,” I rejoined.

“But suppose Uncle Albert should follow us?”

“Now that we are out of that hornet’s nest I rather wish he would. I
must meet him face to face and have this out!”

“No, Don Compie, please! please! he might get me again,” she pleaded.
“I would much rather die.” She clung to my arm tightly as we made our
way to the farm house. I knocked, the door was opened by a kindly
faced, stooped-shouldered old man in his shirt sleeves. I told him my
daughter and I had met with an accident about five miles back in the
country, and were walking to the nearest garage--would he accommodate
us with a little breakfast. He looked at me long and searchingly--I
say long, perhaps it was only a second; then as if satisfied with
the examination, he said yes, if we didn’t mind cooking the bacon,
he could give us some bread, milk and apple-butter. But his wife had
died two months ago, and his boys had already gone to the field to
plough and were waiting for him; so there was no one to wait on us.
“But just make yourselves at home,” he added, as he shuffled about in
thick soled boots, pouring what was left from a can of milk into an
earthen pitcher, and placing a large loaf of bread before us. “Them
automobiles,” and he shook his head disgustedly, “when they make up
their minds to stop, thir’s just no way setten thim up again, is thir?
No, sir, gimme a pair of mules any day, they’re stidier.”

“My engine went wrong this time, and I simply can’t get the thing
started. I’ll have to be towed in, I’m afraid.”

“Just shut the door when you get done, and if you want water you can
fetch it from the pump yonder.”

I took pains to thank him and pay him for his hospitality, and promised
to close up carefully.

Ellen, minus a hat, sat with her elbows on the table and her chin in
her hands, while the old man moved about putting things a bit in order,
as he called it, before he left. “Since the missus died, I have to
look after everything inside and outside.” This he said as he brushed
the crumbs from the preceding breakfast on to the floor, and then swept
crumbs, dirt and all out of the door.

After he disappeared down the hill, behind the pump, Ellen raised her
eyes appealingly to mine. “What am I to do, Don Compie?” This was
the name she had given me when she was a baby and could not say John
Constable. Her mother, too, had called me by it in later years, to
distinguish me from her husband.

As I have said, it was seven years since I left for Europe in one last
effort to forget her, whom fortune decreed I could not possess. When
I left little Ellen was just a child, almost a baby. But now she was
blooming into womanhood.

“Ellen, dear,” I asked sympathetically, “do you feel strong enough to
tell me of the death of mother and daddy? Were you in the motor with
them at the time of the accident, or just how did it happen?”

“No,” she answered slowly, and unrestrained tears flowed freely down
the pale cheeks, “they were alone with Peter the chauffeur, returning
from Upper Falls. Peter turned into the railing of the bridge to avoid
another machine, which was coming very fast--the railing gave way,
Peter jumped and escaped injury, but mother and daddy were caught under
the car. Daddy was dead when they found him, but mother lived almost a
day.”

I had grown callous to suffering and trouble as I approached middle
age, but my heart was touched as it never had been before. I slowly
patted the white hand in an effort to disclose my feelings, but I’m
afraid the child has never known the depth of them to this day.

“You see,” she continued bravely, “it was because daddy died first that
mother’s will and not his became valid, and in it she left everything,
including the home at Pine Grove where Uncle Albert lives, to me. Daddy
bought it in just recently, because Uncle Albert had mortgaged it so
heavily that it was to be sold and daddy wanted to keep it in the
family.

“Uncle Albert was furious when he heard mother had made you my
guardian. He begged and begged me to marry him. I was raging, and
threatened to write you all about it. Then he lured me to the country.
He wrote that he was very ill, and I believed him. Watkins told me
everything immediately. He said Uncle Albert had sent you a fake
telegram, and he had seen him put something in the whiskey, but he,
Watkins, had filled it with water, so it would not hurt you. I was
frantic--every exit in the wing of the house where I was imprisoned
was locked. Dear, dear, I was frantic--about midnight I seemed to feel
mother’s presence beside me impelling me to go to your assistance. I
heard something that sounded like a pebble hit the glass in my window.
At first I was afraid to look out. It was Watkins, and he threw me a
rope. I quickly tied one end to the radiator, and made my escape. As I
flew through the corridor I felt a hand clutch me. It was Uncle Albert.
He told me he would kill me if I let you know we were in the house.
Then--in this terrible second of desperation you found me.”

“The brute,” I muttered between my teeth. “He wired me to come and help
search for you--that you had eloped with a man who wanted your fortune,
but that he had a clue and wanted me to help solve it.”

“Don’t you see,” she replied, “he had carefully planned to poison you,
and then he was going to force me to marry him, for without father he
had absolutely no means of support.”

“And he was taking the line of least resistance,” I thought--“the line
that leads to nowhere.”

“Heavens, what do you think he was going to do with me, Don Compie?”

I never recall having seen such a look of appeal and terror registered
upon the face of any other person in my life.

“My little Ellen,” said I, holding the two hands firmly in my own, “do
you know I loved your mother very dearly? I always wanted the right to
protect her, but it was denied me--your daddy won out. She is gone, but
you are left. Will you trust yourself to my care?”

She answered with a look that meant more than words--a look that I
would have given my soul to have had from another twenty years before.

We washed the dishes, closed the old man’s door and started toward our
destination, for I had resolved to find Ellen comfortable quarters with
a companion before I finished the affair with Albert.

The rain had ceased and there was a peculiarly clear, cool freshness in
the atmosphere for a day in August. The hills that surrounded the farm
house made clear scallops of green against a pure blue background, and
it was hard to believe that turmoil and trouble could exist in such
quiet, pleasant surroundings.

We were commenting upon the peacefulness of the scene when an ambulance
approached over the hill before us. The road was unusually rough
and narrow, a typical country road edged with chinquapin bushes and
dogwood trees, whose leaves had already started to turn scarlet, hiding
clusters of berries beneath them.

The ambulance swayed from side to side and heeded not the ruts or
stones in its wake. As “coming events cast their shadows before,” I was
quite confident of its destination. I motioned to the driver who gave
me a sharp glance and held the horses in a walk just long enough to
inform me quickly of their errand.

“To Mr. Albert Wilbur’s,” was the answer to my question.

“Dead?” I asked.

“Don’t know, a servant ’phoned that he had tried to commit suicide.”

“Take us back, we’re related,” I said.

We returned to the house from which we had fled--to find that the two
shots, which the misguided man had fired, had done their work only too
well. There remained but the frame of him who had given nothing and
taken all.

As for myself, I was left alone in the world with this gentle, naïve
child, and I prayed each day that she would be more generous with her
love than her mother had been--and she was.

It was like a gift from heaven sent to heal a wounded and longing heart.




                             THE REPORTER.


I made the journey in a motor painted grey--a stylish one upholstered
in velvet, and there were things inside to blow and touch for
convenience. Be not disillusioned--it did not belong to me. It and
the chauffeur were loaned for the occasion by my married sister. Yes,
of course, married, because I believe that was what she married for.
Anyway, I sat back in this rapidly moving equipage, looking, I believe,
very comfortable, but feeling, I am sure, very--now just how did I
feel, not very, but “ante turban trepidat.” I was shaky and overcome
with the same feeling that one has when about to make his first public
speech, or at least as I imagine one would feel. However, we had
reached the outskirts of the city; the air was pungent with ozone and
there was a wafting fragrance of woods--just woods.

I carried the directions of my destination in my hand, written on a
slip of white paper. “Keep straight ahead on Falls Road, turn west
from Lake Avenue to first road running north; then turn east. First
house to the right,” the paper read. We had ridden but a short distance
after leaving the city--entirely too short for me to compose myself,
when the first house to the right began distinctly to outline itself on
the horizon. The feeling of trepidation which possessed me intensified
itself as we drove up to the door and stopped. Two dogs appeared and
barked, but did not approach me. I say they did not approach me, yet
the only thing I was entirely certain of that second was a black crepe
that hung from the door; it appeared blacker than black, because a
bunch of snow white roses unrelieved by green leaves caught the folds
and held them.

My fingers shook in an endeavor to separate one of my visiting cards
from the pasty tissues that divided them, but they stuck closer than
a mustard plaster. Before I was ready the door was opened by a neatly
dressed, middle-aged colored woman. Without glancing at me or my card
she informed me that Professor Symonds could not be seen.

But I insisted I must, I really must see him. She then scrutinized
me closely, she looked me through and through, and I saw she was
completely fooled. I was suffocated with shame when I thought of my
subterfuge, for I had attired myself in deep mourning--an outfit left
from a recent period of mourning after my brother’s death, as was also
my black-edged card.

“But, honey, he’s ’tirely done give out. I knows he won’t see no-body.”

“I’ve come so far, do inquire,” I pleaded.

“Well, jess you wait here and I’ll see. He’s right in there,” she said,
pointing to a room nearby with her head.

“Mayn’t I just go in, he’ll not mind,” I lied.

“You sure, Miss?” the look in her eyes adding force to the question.

“Quite sure.”

I followed her as she turned the knob on the sacred door and announced
me. She opened it a bit wider. I was close behind, and before anything
else happened I was in.

Professor Symonds looked handsome; that was because he was sitting
down. His nose was large, but well shaped. Perhaps, after reflecting
somewhat, I should say it was a bit too long. His forehead was just
an ordinary forehead. But his eyes--let me see, they were of an
indescribable color, and his lashes were very long--either long or his
eyes were deeply set. I think it was both that gave me the impression.
You see I was only sent to interview him and I tried not to stare.
Besides it was his mouth that I wanted to look at, and in fact I am
conscious now of having looked too hard, but his mouth was decidedly
crooked. When he laughed it was more so, but his teeth were large,
white and straight. So on the whole it did not detract from his
appearance, but I had a keen inclination to hold his mouth and force
him to smile straight. Smile I say, but I had only seen him smile once
and then very slightly. What I really wanted to do was to coerce him,
but it could not be done; he was thinking--thinking of something that
was not conducive to smiles.

He arose slowly to greet me. Arose, as one disturbed most unwillingly.
While rising he screwed the top on his fountain pen and leisurely
adjusted it to his inside pocket. He received me kindly but with
manifest annoyance. His face reddened when I told him my mission,
and he walked deliberately away from me after I became seated. This
discouraged me, but I noticed to my complete satisfaction that he was
not handsome--he was not handsome and his clothes were not a good fit.
I was glad of these facts, because when I entered the room there was
something in the atmosphere, something intangible about the melancholy
figure that excited my sympathy and even made my heart beat quicker.
But now I saw plainly from his demeanor--his utter indifference--that
he regarded me only as a reporter. This was why I was glad to see he
was just a short, homely man.

I said, “I hope you’ll pardon my intrusion at this trying hour. I was
compelled to come for an interview.”

“Interview! How extraordinary, when a man’s wife is lying dead.” His
air of surprise did not deceive me, for I knew that many reporters
had preceded me. But I felt hurt in my whole being at the rebuff. How
could I justify myself for having to confront him at this hour--for this
indelicate visit. My color rose, I rose, and the temperature rose. For
a moment I could not speak; when my voice returned I replied humbly,
most humbly, “The editor gave me the assignment, and I try never to
fall down on my job. You must know that it is hard--quite as hard for
me as it is for you.” I felt all at once the fact that in my effort to
succeed in my business I had overlapped conventionalities too rashly.

“Damn editors, they have no feeling for anyone,” he muttered; then
asked my pardon. I bowed my head and tried to look more modest than a
reporter can look.

I saw now that I had a slight chance of procuring an interview, and
strange as it may seem I was beginning to like him again. He was
entirely uncommon and the possessor of a face embroidered with lines
from study and sorrow, and a composure that was calm but forceful.

Ill at ease as I was I made up my mind to stick and see the thing
through. A “scoop” like this for my editor meant more for me than I can
explain on paper. I pretended to be moving for the door, but wasn’t;
it was only another subterfuge--the forced weapon of a reporter.
Such things are not meant to beguile; but they are a slight means of
delusion. So unless you are adapted to the use of them do not apply for
a reporter’s job.

Professor Symonds slowly walked back from the window, which was not
far, because the house was a cottage and the rooms small.

He looked at me squarely, slightly pityingly, for I am sure he was
sorry that one so young could be so bold. As for myself I was thinking
that perhaps I should live to be an old, old lady--thin scrawny people
generally do; but never should I forget with what pride and exultation
I had received this assignment. It was first given to Mr. Tyler, our
best reporter and our most vivid writer. He failed completely in
his efforts to communicate with Professor Symonds, even after he had
resorted to detective work. From him it descended step by step to me.
Descended most describes the process, for I was a journalist just
starting my career and this was the first important piece of work that
I had received. Hence my resolution to remain immutable in my decision
to stick for the information that my paper so desired. Previous to
this affair the majority of my best literary efforts had suffered an
evanescence into the world at large. Perhaps John, the janitor, knew of
their whereabouts--he always emptied the waste-baskets.

“So you wish me to talk for publication, do you; to lay the facts of my
life open to the criticism of the public?”

“No, I--I”----

“Well, I shall do nothing of the kind. The lives of myself and family
are entirely my own affair, and no one need count on my giving the
papers material with which to fill up their columns.”

“But--but the affair was important.”

“Important or not, it is mine and with me it shall die. It’s a shame,
a shame I say, to send young girls to pry into one’s private life.”
It was evident that this speech was from one who could suppress his
feelings no longer. Nevertheless, I had grown hot and indignant at his
words. At the same time I was becoming alarmed at the nearness of the
door to me. This in a way prevented my pungent remarks from having the
effect they otherwise would have had.

“If I were allowed to choose my assignments, Professor Symonds, I
assure you I should not have chosen this one.” This retort was,
perhaps, a trifle impudent, considering the fair treatment I had at
first received, but it was made without thought, and I was sorry as
soon as I realized what I had said.

His speech had caused him remorse, for he was no longer cold and
phlegmatic. His attitude of aloofness changed suddenly and completely
to fatherly kindness, which made itself felt as he tendered his
apologies and again offered me a chair. It was my turn to assume
indifference, for I saw now that I was mistress of the situation. I
drew myself in, so to speak, smiled a hurt smile and seated myself.

“I thought you might throw a bit of light on Mr. Milton’s death,” I
ventured again.

“The man is dead, why not let it go at that,” he suggested, for by
this time he had become docile and his attitude suggested capitulation.

“But don’t you see,” I explained, “it’s my assignment, and I must take
back something. If it doesn’t go with me you’ll only be harassed by
others. Why not say just what you know?”

“Do you expect newspaper work to get you anywhere?” This was partly to
change the subject, and partly to manifest some interest in me.

“Indeed, yes,” I replied, “the practice lays a foundation for better
writing. Of course, there are things about it that I hate, such as
this, but on the whole it is good for one. You see there is no waiting
for an impulse to write, which seldom comes naturally to one. The work
is there and it must be done. This forced writing teaches concentration
and rapidity, while at the same time it keeps one awake to the
movements of the day, nationally and internationally.” This was from my
heart, for it was for this reason alone that I had associated myself
with the press.

“Perhaps,” he said, “perhaps, but it robs girls of their modesty, and
it teaches them to exaggerate events.” This brutally frank statement
brought me perilously to the verge of tears. At the same time it
brought the realization that this particular piece of news--if
I succeeded in my purpose--must be reported correctly in every
detail--there could be no exaggeration. And I wondered why I cared.

These thoughts must have shown in my eyes. There must have been
something about my expression that made my friend sorry for me. I say
friend, because I felt from this moment that he was my friend.

“But, of course,” he went on, “there are always exceptions. I know you
are one and I hope you will remain one.” I thanked him and renewed my
efforts to worm the desired information out of him. He explained that
his aversion to newspapers was due to the pain he had but recently
suffered from a great sorrow.

“Had I been a rich man instead of a poor professor there would have
been no scandal published about my wife.”

“How could you have prevented it?” I asked innocently. I was not
innocent, for I had heard much of papers being bought off by
advertisers.

“By buying them off.”

“Then the story was true, was it not?”

His face reddened, he realized his admission.

“You are the first reporter who has been permitted to enter this
house. I have treated you with courtesy and I trust you will spare
me any further humiliation in this affair.” Such an appeal--it came
straight from his heart, but how could I befriend him? I felt myself
becoming entangled in a desperate situation. All that he said was true,
but on the other hand I had been requested to handle the case carefully
and procure the interview at any cost.

I had no doubt that I could obtain the story now, Professor Symonds
was my victim or my friend, whichever I wished to make of him. The
event rested with me; yet I could not forget with what confidence and
assurance I had received the assignment together with full directions
for finding the house. Where would I end? I played carelessly with
the beads around my neck, pulled my hat a little further to the side,
pretended to catch my veil tighter, and then smoothed the wrinkles out
of the arms of my gloves; but I could not decide which road to take.

Professor Symonds was longing for a friend--a sympathizer. He was dying
to talk--to unburden himself, and the moment seemed propitious. He gave
an appealing look and without further protest began to talk.

“This is the story. I give it to you. Do with it what you will.” From
that second, with me, love took the place of admiration, and I knew
that he knew the story was safe.

“It is true that my wife eloped with Milton.” As he uttered these words
his emotion overpowered him, and he dropped his head in his hands. It
affected me so painfully that I tried to restrain him from harrowing
his feelings any further. But it seemed as if he understood the
sympathetic attitude of his visitor, and wished to confide in me. He
continued:

“But there were circumstances that caused it. She was a good woman,
a really good woman, but our tastes were entirely different. She
loved the city and its closeness to ‘things’; I loved the country
and its freedom from noise. She loved people; I loved solitude. And
besides these differences there were things which you are too young to
understand.”

I had the natural curiosity of woman and her native diplomacy. So I did
not interrupt the continuity of his thoughts.

“Both men and women have strongly developed or even instinctive sex
complexes and the physical call of a mate transcends the restrictions
that herd instinct places upon our modern society. In other words, it
is the elemental appeal that is too strong for the system of barriers
society has thrown around modern life. We were congenial, yes, loving
and loved, but our natures differed; our habits had not grown together,
so our ways parted through no fault of either. Our emotional structures
also differed, and the instinctive emotions dominated. Perhaps you will
think this explanation incongruous, but I know it to be the truth,
and the result of it all is what I am now facing. I see now that my
selfishness was chiefly responsible. I was, by nature, the stronger of
the two; it was in my power to influence my wife, but we drifted and
the realization of the situation came too late.

“In her loneliness she had appealed to Milton and he responded. In him
she found a companion with a kindred spirit. They both loved life and
what it brought. Now that they are both dead there is only one thing I
can do for them, and that is to preserve their reputations, and save
them from the disgrace of a disclosure. The public only knows, from
the letter found on Milton, that they loved each other; it does not
and shall not know more.” His head was bent and his voice filled with
anguish.

“If I had only known sooner I believe I could have saved her the tragic
end. She was returning to me--returning to me, I am confident, for she
had entered the garden before she swallowed the poison.”

I still did not speak or move and he talked on without a pause. But now
he seemed to pull himself together, and I could see an increasing air
of satisfaction and gratification in his demeanor, as he found himself
confiding in a hearer who was growing more and more sympathetic.

“It is evident that Milton had left her. It was what such propensities
always lead to and only what I had expected. Life to be successful
must be regular and conventional. We humans are too susceptible to the
opinions of others to ignore for long any irregularities, and, as I
say, he had left her and gone to Washington. Perhaps he was returning
to his wife or perhaps he had just grown tired; anyhow he had reached
there before he heard that Helen was dead. He probably thought I’d kill
him, so he saved me the trouble.

“Dear, dear, how I should love to do something for you,” I said
involuntarily, urged by the flood of sympathy the tragic tale had
evoked. Then I realized that Professor Symonds might misunderstand me
and think my remark too forward.

“It isn’t a situation to be envied, is it?”

When he asked the question I was thinking of life and its perplexities;
the happiness and sorrows that circumstances render without the power
on our part either to aid or alter. Here was a man of rare intellectual
qualities, a pleasing personality, position and--best of all--a soul;
yet he, like others, must live and suffer apparently through no fault
of his--but through the thoughtlessness of a pleasure-seeking wife.
My sympathy was spontaneous. Is it any wonder that a warm friendship
sprang up between us?

And is it needless to say there was no “scoop” for the paper? In fact,
my days with the press were numbered. The little cottage needed a
feminine touch, and I needed all the love Professor Symonds could give
me. Yet I have never been able to fathom why he married me, for my eyes
were dark but not luminous; my hair was light, not golden; I was thin
and bony; I was tall, yet not erect; I wanted to be wise, but had lots
to learn.




                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious punctuation and spacing errors have been corrected.

Page 29: “remarkd Mrs. Gary” changed to “remarked Mrs. Gary”; “in in
the last two” changed “in the last two”

Page 30: “relief the monotomy” changed to “relief the monotony”

Page 47: “as she realizes that” changed to “as she realized that”

Page 49: “going to chuch” changed to “going to church”

Page 54: “she had believe it” changed to “she had believed it”

Page 70: “for there has never been” changed to “for there had never
been”

Page 75: “sweet timber of a” changed to “sweet timbre of a”

Page 93: “his indelicate visit” changed to “this indelicate visit”





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIG IRON ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


