The Project Gutenberg eBook of Duar the accursed
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Duar the accursed

Author: Clifford Ball

Illustrator: Margaret Brundage
        Virgil Finlay

Release date: May 20, 2025 [eBook #76127]

Language: English

Original publication: Indianapolis, IN: Popular Fiction Publishing Company, 1937

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DUAR THE ACCURSED ***





                           Duar the Accursed

                           By CLIFFORD BALL

               _A surprizing tale about the Black Tower
               and the intrusion therein of a barbarian
                adventurer--a strange weird tale of the
                    love of a queen for her enemy._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                         Weird Tales May 1937.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Nione of the Krall Dynasty, ruler of Ygoth, for all her lithe beauty
of rounded limbs, sat on her throne like a man, with an elbow resting
on crossed knees and knuckles under chin. Before her a ring of guards
surrounded a bareheaded man of great stature whose bronze, half-naked
body was loaded down with heavy chains. Many scars and sword-cuts
testified to the difficulty of his capture. The man stood insolently
gazing over the Queen's head at the purple and gold of the tapestries
as though something of great interest held his attention to their
scarlet colors. The fair occupant of the throne, accustomed to bended
knees and supplications, was rapidly losing her temper.

"Speak, dog!" she cried. "Find your tongue, or by Krall I'll have my
torturers find it with the plucking-tongs!"

At last the captive deemed it best to answer. He did not hurry. His
gaze wandered slowly from the walls to the guards, from the guards to
the chains on his limbs, at which he stared as though in surprized
discovery, and finally to the enraged features of Queen Nione of Ygoth.

"Faith," he said, and his tone was slurred and deep, "by the look of
you you'd be a better warrior than a man's mistress!"

Around him his chains rattled as the guards gave nervous starts. The
two women-slaves crouching at the foot of the dais turned as pale as
their brown skins would permit. Queen Nione lost all of her regal
bearing and some of her dignity.

"I am no man's mistress!" she shrieked like any fish-wife. "But you
will learn before long who I am, creature! I'll brand my name on you
with letters of fire!"

"And I'll carry it a long way, Your Majesty," interrupted the undaunted
captive. A slight curl of his firm lips belied any humility.

"Only to the slave galleys, dog!" taunted Nione. "I see by the marks on
your back you are not unacquainted with them. You've felt the weight of
the lash before."

"Sure. And I've felt the weight of a crown, too, but perhaps a little
less heavily, for the mark of it seems to be gone."

The prisoner smiled with a flash of white teeth that split the
tanned grimness of his countenance like a beam of light over a dark
battlefield. One of the guards jerked impatiently on a chain. The smile
faded as the captive gave his captor a level stare holding the threat
of death behind calm blue eyes. The guard shuffled his feet nervously
until Queen Nione, watching the byplay, chose to become expressive.

"Fools! What have I in my guardsmen? Dancing-girls from Nyema?"

"Three of them danced into Hell but a little while ago," muttered the
chained man.

"What is your name, O Mighty One?" mocked Nione.

"Men call me Duar."

The Queen of Ygoth relaxed on her cushioned throne as a wave of
surprize swept the clouds of anger from her face. She raised one hand
unconsciously to suddenly pallid features. If the guardsmen had been
startled before, now they were certainly in panic, much as if they had
captured one of the terrible white apes from the hills of Barsoom and
were unable to let it go. Backing to the extreme limits of the chains
they held, they attempted to go still farther without endangering
themselves or their Queen by entirely releasing the iron bonds. Duar
was forced to extend his arms as the chains threatened to pull him
asunder.

"I see, Nione," he grimaced, "that even in this barbarous country men
have heard of me." He shook his long mane of black hair impatiently.
"Tell these jackals to ease my wrists before I tangle their bones in my
fetters."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nione motioned wordlessly. The guards stepped cautiously nearer
to leave slack in the weights; but one careful fellow placed his
unsheathed sword-tip to the back of Duar's neck and held it there.

"I bring your person no harm, Nione," continued the prisoner, "nor
harm to your subjects. The three I killed I was forced to when they
attacked me in the mountain pass. Faith, it's a fine welcome you give
to visitors to your kingdom!"

"Duar, the Accursed!" breathed Nione. "What demon brings you here?"

"No demon, O Queen. Merely my roving inclinations."

"Demons have always prompted your inclinations, O Duar! Even in this
secluded mountain kingdom have we heard of your familiars from Hell!
Whence came the red rain of blood that covered the battlefield of Kor
and blinded the eyes of the Sivian hosts while your followers cut them
to ribbons? And where the giant black raven that flew above your pirate
galley when you ravished the coasts of Krem? Why did the mountains of
Fuvia shatter themselves over your castles while the mighty hurricane
destroyed your villages and your fields as the raging seas finally
obliterated the whole of the kingdom King Duar had raised with his
pirate hordes? Why, O King who is now a slave?"

"Faith, and I know not," he answered. "Mine has been a strange life,
it's true. Perhaps there is a destiny for me. I sometimes think that
when I have swerved from the chosen path the Gods ordained, it is the
very elements who rise to set me back. But I know little more than you.
I have gone with the wind and the tide. When the Gods said I should be
a king, I was, and a pirate I became likewise."

"It is easy to blame everything on the Gods!"

"Why not?" inquired the prisoner, and his white teeth flashed again. "I
came to this world without asking, but if I leave it 'twill be no fault
of mine."

"Aye, O King and pirate and slave! Whence did you come? What far-off
country saw your birth, you who have the height of the mountain men,
the thin nostrils of the hordesmen of Kor, the black hair of the
cavemen, the blue eyes of those who haunt the islands of the seas, and
the swift strength of the dwellers of the plains? In all of our world
there has never been born such a composite prodigy of nature. Or are
you of our world? A demon, perhaps, in the guise of man? You were never
a child--to human knowledge. Even the seers can trace you no farther
back than your first battles, and your history is not in the stars.
Whence?"

"Again I am ignorant, Nione."

The captive's eyes were pensive and his brow furrowed in thought.
The ruler of Krall gazed at his features watchfully, but some of the
sternness was gone from her face and only the slaves and the wide-eyed
guardsmen noticed the easy familiarity with which the prisoner ignored
the rightful titles of their Queen. The highest member of the court
would have had his tongue torn from its roots for using such a form of
address to the Queen of Ygoth.

"My first memories are of the clash and ring of metal upon metal in
the heat of a great battle and sweat and blood on my face as I called
our battle-cry. I was a mercenary on the field of Sate fighting in the
service of the fool King TÃ¦rus, whom later I had the satisfaction of
spitting on my sword."

"Over a dancing-girl!" concluded the Queen spitefully, and sniffed.

The captive shrugged but remained silent.

Nione contemplated the swordsman through half-closed eyes. Calmly he
returned her gaze, and something in the depths of his fierce blue eyes
caused her pulse to beat a little faster, and a faint flush tinged her
alabaster cheeks.

"If," she asked finally, irritated at these signs of weakness in her
august person, "my guards should conduct you in safety to the limits of
my borders, on any side you desire, would you go--peacefully?"

Again Duar shrugged and the chains rattled. "Perhaps," he said.
"Perhaps--not."

"You fool!" cried Nione, now crimson. "I am giving you your life! Know
you I could have you impaled, torn apart, killed a thousand ways! I
grant you mercy and you care nothing?"

"Mercy? For what? For defending myself from onslaught? From cruelty?
Your eyes belie the name you seek to frighten with!" He sighed. "Almost
I wish I were a king again!"

"Throw him into the Pits!" screamed the outraged ruler of Ygoth.
"And--and put extra chains on him!"

As the guards led their captive away, the foremost stepping hastily
before the long strides of the prisoner, Duar called mockingly back
over his shoulder: "Beware, O Queen Nione, lest the red rain come and
the black raven perch on the turrets of your castles!"

One of the guards dropped his end of the chain, whereat the captain, to
hide his own fears, kicked him lustily as he stooped to recover it.

Nione stared, white-faced, as a peal of laughter rolled back from the
dark corridor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Pits of Ygoth, far beneath the turrets and spires of the fair city
above, reeked of the staleness and corruption of centuries. Age-old
dampness permeated the foul atmosphere; small creatures of this dank
underworld scampered and scurried just beyond the torchlights of the
guards. The clanking of Duar's chains, now multiplied until even his
mighty frame staggered beneath their weight, awoke echoes now near, now
far, until it seemed to the small body of men that they were intruding
into the haunts of all the long-dead kings and warriors of ancient
Krall and their lost souls were girding up rusty mail for ghostly
conflict.

"This one will do." The captain's voice was harsh.

Duar was pushed through a rusty barred door and flung into a corner,
the crash of his irons shattering the stillness of the Pits for a mile
or more throughout their silent depths. His chains attached to corroded
iron rungs on the wall, he lay watching the last glimmer of torchlight
fade from the damp stones as the muffled footsteps of the guards died
away down the passage. Darkness rushed in triumphant, clashing against
his eyeballs with almost physical impact.

The man who had been a king smiled into the black inferno. A memory of
the alabaster features of Nione rose before him and the smile became a
grin. He moved into a slightly dryer corner of the cell and stretched
out his legs as comfortably as possible, removing some object that felt
like a dried shinbone from beneath his spine. His chains grew quiet
again. Something scuttled past the doorway and he had an impression of
tiny, gleaming red eyes.

Duar slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke with a sense of uneasiness, akin to the disturbed nerves of a
jungle animal before approaching peril; not as a civilized man, drowsy
from deep slumber, but instantly, fully cognizant of his surroundings
and predicament. Only a slight twitching of his sword-arm answered his
first nervous impulse to reach for the weapon that was not there.

Silence and everlasting night reigned where the cleanliness of the sun
had never shone. Duar's straining eyes met only blankness and told his
tense figure nothing, but his ears gave proof that even the scamperings
and rustlings had stilled, and sub-consciously he knew some alien
presence had frightened them away--a presence without sound, but his
heart and brain and whatever intangible part of him men called the soul
were clamoring a nerve-shattering alarm.

Suddenly tiny molecules of light flickered in the black chaos before
him, twisting and tumbling in a circular area like separate parts, as
if each held a tiny life of its own. They spread no beams to reveal the
rude chamber; outside of their small circumference the dungeon remained
as dark as ever, but within the whirling area of infinitesimal sparks
an unearthly glow became brighter and brighter.

Duar had seen sorcery before over half the world, even in the black
mountains of his own forbidding kingdom before the great walls fell to
bury it for ever from the sight of man, but some intuition told him he
was confronted by a hitherto unwitnessed demonstration. This, thought
he, was a witch-fire. He sat quietly; he had not once moved a limb from
the moment he awoke.

A voice came from the light, a sweet, soft, woman's voice that
nevertheless, in spite of its obvious femininity, held undertones of
power.

"Duar!" it called. "Duar! Do you hear, O Duar?"

"I hear you, devil," growled the man in chains. "What wizardry is this,
you spawn of Hell, and what do you want of me?"

"Duar, my lord!" The scintillating area of light, if the unnatural glow
could be described as light, expanded until it was nearly eight feet in
diameter. The dethroned king felt terrific forces struggling in wild
efforts for freedom there before him, but though the outlines of the
circle quivered and writhed they held fast to their shape. Somehow the
captive knew he should be glad that this was so; his barbarian blood
felt the touch of fear.

"Duar, beloved, have you forgotten my voice in these few short eons?"

"What talk is this of love and eons?" growled the beleaguered man.
"Faith, and I've never known the two to be associated outside of song!
And if I had free hands with a sword in them I'd see what cold steel
would find in that fire-ball of yours, demon or succuba, or whatever
you are!"

"Perhaps if you saw me you would remember," said the sweet tones. "I
had hopes----"

The center of the fire grew dim and blurred as a maid's breath blurs
her mirror. Slowly, by degrees, appeared the face and figure of a
woman--or a Thing resembling a woman.

"In the Name of----" gasped Duar, shocked from his philosophic calm at
last.

"Nay, do not name the lesser Gods, O Duar," counseled the figure.
"Rather, call on Him Whom you have the right to call on, the God of
Gods, the Ancient One Who is older than the earth or men, He of Whom
_you_ were the high priest!"

The words only half penetrated the captive's mind. He was staring at
a vision that within the innermost chambers of his mind he knew could
not have been born of human flesh. Her form was incased in one long
robe of shimmering white, a robe of strange weave and texture to Duar's
astonished eyes, held by a black girdle at the waist. The perfect
figure beneath the single garment was obvious in every line and curve
up to the white column of the shapely throat and the queenly contour
of face and brow. Her raven-black hair fell in a long cascade over the
proudly held shoulders. In the depths of her dark, hypnotic eyes swam
all the black suns of the universe in a constant play of ebony light.
Neither flaw nor blemish marred the ivory perfection of her features.
Beauty incarnate in the Pits of Ygoth!

"Do you remember yet, O Duar?" she of the fire was asking. "Can you
recall--the Name?"

The barbarian warrior who had never flinched before man or beast or
devil placed his hands over his face and crouched in the corner of
his dungeon as a thousand wild memories and desires crashed at his
brain--_from within!_ The walls of the Pits seemed to shake, the very
earth to tumble from its balance; great winds from the outer voids
pulled and tore at his body. Or was it _his_ body, this form composed
of flesh and blood that called itself Duar? For an instant he and the
figure in white were high among the stars in the infinity of space,
and earth and men and kingdoms were no more. He was about to see, to
comprehend, some great knowledge.

Suddenly the universe began to spin. A black cloud from nowhere
enveloped his brain and it became a blank thing. He was back in
the Pits of Ygoth with a whirling light and the Thing that was too
beautiful to be a woman.

"Failure, O Ancient One!" the voice was saying. "Again I have come
too soon! How many more eons must your servant wait? How many more
earths must crumble and suns grow cold before he remembers Shar, this
poor earth-bound spirit that was once your greatest worshipper? Then,
and then only, with his aid and the knowledge which is locked in his
spirit, I may resurrect the truths so that your greatness and our elder
race will prevail once more! How long?"

       *       *       *       *       *

King Duar, now released from the power waves that had enmeshed his
mind, became his bold self again. He set his eyes fiercely on the
shining form, and although his limbs still shook from the internal
holocaust he spoke bravely.

"Curse these hell-haunted dungeons where a man cannot even die in
peace! And curse your chattering, woman--if woman you are! If I had
but freedom and a sword----"

"Pity, O Duar! I never gave pity to anyone else, and the feeling of it
is strange. You, who could have all the kingdoms of the world--yes, and
of other worlds--and all you want is a sword!"

"With a sword I cut my own kingdom!" boasted Duar, undaunted. "With a
sword I could cut your throat!"

"Poor Duar, housing a spirit too great for himself! Do you ever dream
you are not as other men? That once, long ago, you were one of the
Masters? I trailed you across time, O little man----"

"Little man!" exploded the fuming barbarian, his rage bursting all
mental bonds and carrying away his power of coherent speech in a red
torrent of madness.

"Losing the world and caring naught," said she of the light. "Losing a
kingdom and caring naught. Losing liberty--all for the sake of the Rose
of Gaon!"

The prisoner ceased to rattle his chains in his frenzy. With great
gulps of the foul air he stifled the madness in his blood.

"How did you know that?" he whispered harshly. "How did you know what
only I, the only living man on earth, had knowledge of?"

The figure smiled at him. "The only living--yes. But I am Shar, who
knows everything save the knowledge locked in your spirit that belongs
to another greater than common men, the knowledge of the high priest
you once were and which you do not know you possess."

"Indeed you are a demon," grunted Duar.

"No demon. You have forgotten the arts. Demons are my slaves. It is a
demon who guards the Rose of Gaon in the northwestern tower of Ygoth.
If you must, go strike him down. Maybe combat with the evil forces
will shrink this human flesh of yours and the true spirit will escape
to join me and end my quest. Perhaps! Even I, Shar, cannot tell! Go."

"Go?" roared Duar. "You may go, you devil sent here from Hell to
torture me! You may be as beautiful as the Devil's mistress, but if I
could get my fingers on that white neck of yours----"

He rattled the mocking chains in an agony of despair.

"Those?" Shar smiled.

Suddenly a portion of the light circle broke away from the revolving
main mass, and darting like a flash of steel in campfire light it
touched the heavy chains on the prisoner's body. Amazed, the barbarian
leapt to his feet as a hundred severed links of iron that had been his
fetters clattered about his ankles.

"Go," said Shar, "to the Rose of Gaon and the demon in the tower. I
will be watching, my lord, even as when I blinded your enemies in
battle and guided your ship at sea. Perhaps even Time will relent its
waywardness!"

Abruptly Duar stood alone in the blackness of the Ygoth Pits.

"Accursed witch!" he exclaimed aloud. "Rescue it may be, but no good
will come of it! In another hour or two Nione would have been curious
enough to send for me. Now where in the name of the Seven Gods is that
door?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Queen of Krall braided her golden hair in preparation for
retirement to the royal bed and smiled an appreciative commendation to
her reflection in the jewel-studded mirror. She was fully aware of her
beauty and exercised it on occasions before visiting diplomats. Before
the nobles of her own court she retained the masculine manners of her
dead father, and although she knew they penetrated her bruskness, she
cared little. In her judgment there was no one in the kingdom of Ygoth
fit to share the double throne.

As she completed the last plait and thrust the braids back, a vision
arose before her of the statuesque adventurer she had that day
committed to the Pits. He _was_ a handsome man; obviously interesting.
A bold warrior, also, with a hundred legends to his record. Apparently
a temper to match her own. Her thoughts strayed. If _he_ had been a
noble of the court instead of the vagrant, dispossessed ruler of a
buried kingdom!... A tinge of pink embellished her fair complexion.
Nione, thinking like a courtezan!

Suddenly her eyes grew wide with terror and the blush became a pallor
as reflected movement in the glass surface showed billowings in the
draperies. Someone had entered, unannounced, the sacred precinct that
was the bedchamber of the Queen. Her personal handmaiden had already
been dismissed; the guardsmen outside would never have had the temerity
to enter unless an alarm had been given. What danger stalked here?
Assassination?

In spite of the trembling in her limbs and the pounding heart beneath
her flimsy night attire, regal Nione of Ygoth spoke in a calm,
authoritative voice: "What coward comes skulking in the dark?"

"One who resents the appellation, Your Majesty," replied Duar, stepping
through the portieres, and still damp from the dungeons. His right hand
held a sword, unsheathed.

However the apparition of a vengeful prisoner released in her boudoir
may have affected Nione, there seemed to be more color to her cheeks
and a returned ease to her posture as she swung to face him. In her
heart she knew here was no assassin.

"Apparently my Pits are not deep enough!"

"Nor would be the pits of Hell if I wished to view Your glorious
Majesty!"

"Nor my guards strong enough!"

"Nor guards, nor swords----"

"Whence came the one you hold?" asked the Queen, pointing to the bright
blade Duar held at rest.

"The guard without, my Queen, is now without his sword." Again
the white teeth flashed. "I was hungry and I could not find the
kitchens. But as I wandered about, marveling at the splendor--and the
inhospitality--of so magnificent a Queen, I perceived before these
doors a certain belligerent person who rudely accosted me. When he
became vicious I was forced to relieve him of his weapon. I trust his
skull is not so badly cracked; I but wished to pacify his war-like
inclinations."

Nione interrupted with a gale of silvery laughter. Her merriment, the
thrown-back head and pulsing throat, momentarily swept his senses with
a surge of admiration. Whatever Shar was, she might be, but here was
something human!

"You burst the heaviest chains in my deepest Pits, find your way
through endless corridors, wander through my halls at will and,
unarmed, smite down one of the best warriors in my kingdom to force
your way into the chambers of the Queen where no man has trod in
years--then you apologize!"

She rocked in unqueenly mirth.

"You--are not afraid?" he asked softly.

"Of Duar? No! I know your history--the part known to men--too
well! You are no evil ravisher or torturer of women. Of Duar the
Accursed--perhaps--a little! There may be demons in your shadow I care
not to see!"

"Then in the Names of the Gods, get me something to eat!" swore the
ex-captive. "I starve, woman!"

He flung the sword carelessly on the silken coverlets of the royal
couch.

       *       *       *       *       *

A drowsy hand-maid, eyes still blurred from sleep, appeared in answer
to the imperial summons on the bell-rope. Evidently she surmised the
outstretched guard at the portals was in a state of slumber instead
of unconsciousness, for her features registered no alarm until they
espied the giant form of the adventurer sprawled in a royal chair. To
her fear-stricken eyes and gaping mouth Nione said: "Food, immediately,
for myself--you understand? And if you breathe one word you go back to
slavery! Hasten."

"Or I slit your throat!" added Duar lazily.

The startled servant vanished in a whirlwind of terror.

"I ordered food for you in the cells," stated the Queen, ominously.
"Were my guards afraid to serve it?"

"I did not like the banquet hall," observed the late captive. He
regarded her through lowered eyelids. Was this ready acquiescence some
feminine trick?

When the food arrived, Duar commanded the slave to sit on a divan in
the corner. He trusted little to a servant's tongue, fearful or not,
and if he perceived the sigh of relief Nione emitted over the enforced
chaperonage, he chose not to comment on it. When the tender meat of the
fowl's flesh was devoured and washed down by the white wine of Ygoth's
slopes, he shoved away the serving-tray and reached for the sword he
had won.

"And now?" questioned the hostage Queen.

"We pay a visit, _you_ and I, to the object of my visit--a rare jewel,
if truth be told. And perhaps a demon."

"A--a demon?"

"Aye. The plagued land appears to be surfeited with them. Faith,
I've for ever expected them, never to find them, and found them where
I never expected. But this night I have been made certain by good
authority. Nione, if a thing was stolen from you that you never knew
you possessed, or counted among the values of your kingdom, would it be
robbery?"

The Queen was mystified and a little angered, as puzzled women so often
are.

"You speak in riddles, O slave-king. Though you hold my person you
cannot make a fool of me. Do you know there is not one chance in a
million of your leaving Ygoth alive? And not one chance in ten million
of your crossing the boundaries? You have my person, Duar, but not my
kingdom!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Duar meaningly, "a kingdom lacking a king."

Nione was hushed into apprehensive silence. The fear-stricken maid
trembled in her corner. The erstwhile captive continued his narrow-eyed
scrutiny and a nervous quiet reigned before he spoke again.

"Nione, have you ever heard of the Rose of Gaon?"

"I have fed you and offered you freedom but I will not guess at your
riddles!"

"Spitfire! Have you heard of the Black Tower of Ygoth?"

The Queen shuddered. "Who has not, O Duar? The most feared spot in all
my land, shunned by all! Would I could destroy it, but the ancient laws
and the commands of the priests forbid. My subjects avert their gaze as
they pass, and even the birds of the air will not circle above those
ominous turrets. What seek you in the Black Tower?"

"Fortune! Power to raise a kingdom once more!"

"A kingdom from the lost souls of dead murderers?"

"Aye. I know of your customs. If a man, or a woman at times, commits
a crime so foul that they cannot even be awarded the punishment of a
clean death by sword or of slow starvation in the Pits, the ancient law
of Ygoth ordains the priests shall march them to the entrance of the
Black Tower. There they are left to some inevitable and horrible doom;
inevitable, for they never return from beyond the grim portals. The
secrets of the Tower are lost in antiquity. Only the legends of your
priests, who themselves have never entered, hint at the unknown fates
of the condemned who were driven within the walls. A calloused criminal
may laugh at the sword, but no human heart will fail to beat a little
faster at the threat of the unknown danger."

"They say," whispered Nione, "the Black Tower stood alone when all this
land was barren and my forefathers who founded the dynasty of Krall
were yet unborn! It is a hateful place where even a shrub or vine will
not crawl from the earth. I care not to look upon it."

"And dim the glory of your eyes," commented Duar pleasantly. "Yet this
night we visit therein."

"We? Do you think you can drag _me_ there, of all places, like a common
wench?"

"Or carry. You are my password. Ygoth is too well patrolled, by your
own word, even for me."

"The first guard we meet will imprison you!"

"Not with the ring of Nione before his eyes--and a whisper or two. He
will elevate his eyebrows as we pass and comment to himself that even a
Queen must have diversions."

Nione's cheeks flamed. "Never! No man in all my kingdom would ever
think so of me."

Duar laughed. "Men are always men, even when thinking of a Queen!"

"Beast! Slave! Barbarian!"

"For the moment, 'King.' But to continue. An unfrocked priest, dying
on a battlefield, told me of a jewel called the Rose of Gaon that lay
within the walls of the Black Tower of Ygoth, a jewel magnificent in
size and beauty. He said that I, being Duar the Accursed, could pass in
safety through the chamber of the hopeless dead who have been condemned
there and claim the stone. He was a vengeful creature and I believe he
meant to send me to my death even as he lay dying. Perhaps he did, for
here I am. Now you know why I came to Ygoth. If the words he spoke were
true, with that jewel I could buy enough men to conquer a new kingdom.
Slave I may have been, but there is royal blood in my veins and I
cannot rest unless I am a king!"

       *       *       *       *       *

His last words were delivered in such impassioned tones that the
servant girl was hardly able to stifle a scream. Nione's gaze searched
the depths of his blue eyes and moved on to wander over the scars of
his ragged person.

"It seems," she observed, "the Queen is dethroned. But I have my
pride--and courage. My guards will not break down the doors to find me
screaming like a street-wench in your arms. Maid, bring cloaks!"

"I wonder," mused Duar aloud, "if you'd scream."

Twice in their journey through the streets they were halted by an
inquisitive night patrol, but each time the sight of the Queen's
personal ring gave them free passage and each time Duar chuckled
quietly at the amazed expressions on the faces of the captains
confronted by the royal seal. The second time, as the patrol with its
dim hand-lights passed on, he laughed aloud. Nione deliberately kicked
his shin in a most unqueenly manner.

"If a Queen is ridiculed, no one laughs!" she reminded him fiercely.

"You are the most marvelous of Queens!" swore Duar devotedly.

At the northwestern corner of the city of Ygoth, where the ancient
walls rose against the invaders of centuries ago and the possible ones
of tomorrow, stood the Black Tower, alone in all its majestic solitude,
with no other building or dwelling to share its vicinity. No one cared
to live within the shadows of its evil memories. Once in a decade the
feet of men approached its portals carrying some drugged wretch to be
cast inside the doors that stood always open, like the gates of Hell;
some creature in the form of man who had committed a monstrous crime.
What horrible fate they met within or below the black walls no living
soul ever knew, and only the priests guessed. None ever returned from
the forbidding, evil tower whose ebony turrets rose against the pure
sky like the clutching fingers of a demon from the lowest pits.

Once close to the grim walls the woman who was a Queen and the man who
had been a king halted in silence to survey their goal. Not even a bat
stirred the ghostly stillness. All was darkness, still and remote. Here
in the shadow of the tower the moonlight was gone as if a hand from
Hell had stricken the silvery orb from the heavens. A monument to the
shadowy God of Death.

"Wait for me here, O Nione," said Duar. "If I come back I'll bring
you a king's ransom--if I find you here to lead me again through the
guards. If I find you not--I'll come through the guards alone and drape
the dead demon over your palace walls!"

"My will prevailing, I will be here."

"I'll bring back a share of the Rose for you," promised Duar as he
vanished into the night. An answering whisper came from behind,
momentarily checking his stride: "Bring back yourself, O Duar!"

       *       *       *       *       *

At the threshold, where the great dark portals swung wide, he paused
in a fruitless attempt to peer down the long flight of carven steps
he knew lay before him. The dim reflection of moonlight showed only
the gaping entrance and the rubble and debris of passing centuries;
the time-worn descent to unknown punishment was blotted from the
eye. Barbarian though he was, Duar muttered a prayer to the Seven
Gods before he descended the topmost step, after which he ventured
downward, surely the only man in eons to come upright and not falling
in screaming terror from the hands of executioner priests.

He counted the steps. One hundred, one hundred and fifty--how far into
the earth did they go? He cursed his lack of foresight in not bringing
a torch. A minute later his outthrust foot struck level floor and he
felt his way cautiously along a damp wall, testing each step lest he
cast himself into an unseen pit. The wall was carven curiously; after
feeling some of the figures beneath his fingertips he was almost glad
he had neglected a torch.

Abruptly he felt the Force. It struck him, body and face, like a
blast of hot wind from the deserts. First obstructing, then suddenly
altering, it impeded his progress little as it seemed to hurry him
onward. He became conscious he was almost running in a desperate effort
to keep up with the passage of the air, or Force.

"By the Gods!" he muttered through set teeth. "This is an undignified
way to receive me into Hell!"

The passage ended with startling suddenness; he was in a great chamber
lit by a ruddy glow. The glow came from an object lying upon a huge
stone, carved as a perfect square and resting in the exact center of
the great circular hall. Duar advanced cautiously with drawn sword
toward the source of the light. Several times he stumbled clumsily over
irregular heaps of rubbish on the floor, and once it seemed to him he
only managed to keep from falling by the intentness of his gaze on the
lurid fire before him.

Now he was wading, like one who crosses a mountain torrent breast-high,
and the Force was roaring in his ears until his temples hurt. It
pressed on his head and shoulders, inexorably, urging him to lie down
and rest. Tearing his eyes from the glory of the light, he glanced
about, seeking a level spot on which to relax. The horror he beheld
smote his weary brain back to activity. He was treading over the
_remains of countless skeletons_!

Here lay the answer of the destiny of the wretched culprits condemned
to the Black Tower. Hundreds upon hundreds of them, back through the
centuries, had been thrust down the dark stairway to feel the Force and
hasten onward to their doom. Those who sat down to rest rested there
for ever. An effort to retreat would be like forcing a stone wall with
bare hands; the demon power was too strong. Always must the victim
proceed to the light. The strength and will-power of each was denoted
by the distance he or she covered toward the beckoning light before
they succumbed to the baleful Force. The long-dead bones reflected
dimly the weird glow of the goal they never had reached.

"A curse on you!" roared Duar through the deathly silence of the death
chamber, before he realized he was cursing the object of his quest. For
the light he approached was coming from the heart of the Rose of Gaon!
It lay on a black table of stone, its size as large as Duar's clenched
fist. A magnificent ruby of unnatural circumference, it shone clear
and glowing with a life of its own, shedding supernatural rays over the
dead bones of the underground tomb; the ransom of a thousand kings,
but so great in its dreadful power that no human could own it without
sorcery. The barbarian king stood looking upon its baleful beauty, and
even as his heart surged within his breast he knew it was not for him.

The demon Force struck him squarely. For the fraction of a second
he was back on his heels as his sword cut only the thin air before
him. Ferocious, snarling, the barbarian fought against an intangible
substance he could not see, while the weight of the unknown Thing
pressed about his throat until his breath came in uneven gasps.
Furiously he cursed and struggled before the unseen power as weakness
flowed into his veins and his muscles became lax with fatigue. His
vision encompassed only the dim light of the jewel and the litter of
decayed corpses about, but he battled an invisible monster of fangs
and claws. Long red furrows appeared on his arms and chest, and brutal
welts arose on his head and shoulders.

Duar, the king, knew he was beaten, but Duar the barbarian knew that
only when he died he was dead. The primitive instinct kept him upright,
thrusting into the dark cloud that had risen before him with a last
desperate effort. Still, he recognized doom. No mortal man could
withstand the powers of the demon of the Black Tower, and well he knew
it. The end was inevitable; a barbarian king would join the corpses
of the underground graveyard. So Duar slashed thin air with a useless
weapon and prepared to die.

       *       *       *       *       *

A faint glimmer of sparks in motion caught his eye. They appeared at
his left elbow, not close enough to interfere with sword-play. Shar!

"I cannot fail you now, my lord," came the well-remembered tones he had
heard in the Pits. "Even though you fight for that which is not yours
and the body of another woman, I still support you and your childish
desires. You cannot go in safety now unless you destroy the Rose--and
the powers of the demon with it! Strike the Rose! Strike before the
Hell-spawn destroys the spark in you which belongs to the Ancient One!"

[Illustration: "Destroy the Rose--and the powers of the Demon with it."]

The heavy, two-handed sword slashed into the very center of the baleful
jewel reposing on its ebony pedestal. If a mountain had collapsed the
thunder could have been no greater. Staggering, Duar perceived the
precious fragments flying into a thousand disintegrated bits, while
death winds blew into his face and the walls shook with their mad
forces. Even the corpses seemed to rustle and stir as the elemental
being that had guarded the Rose of Gaon departed the Black Tower for
ever.

Bit by bit the skeletons were crumbling into dust, released from the
eternal slavery of the fatal Rose. Through their shifting dust Duar
stumbled toward the passageway. The shimmering form of his mystifying
ally stood in his path; he halted, eager to depart but unwilling to
desert even a sorceress in the loathsome chamber holding the remains of
dead felons.

"I owe you thanks. My eyes were blinded like those who came before me.
Alone, I would not have thought of striking the jewel."

"No mortal man could have touched that stone, O Duar! It was not even a
jewel--but the heart of a demon. If the blood of the Elder Race did not
flow in your veins you could never have approached so near to it."

"What is your interest in me, witch-woman?" queried the barbarian,
stubbornly. "Why did you free me in the Pits? I have no friends. I am
Duar, the Accursed! I fight for no cause but my own, and my only power
is the sword I hold!"

"You are mistaken!" Shar's voice rose to a higher pitch with the
eloquence of her plea. "Duar, you admit that, even to yourself, your
life has been a mystery. I can explain the mystery and bring back to
you your past, the age-old past when you were a priest of the Elders
and all these peoples now inhabiting the earth were only things
crawling in its mud. Of all the Elders I am the last. Only you, Duar,
have some of the ancient blood, mixed with mankind's, in your human
flesh. I watched you throughout your re-incarnations until, at last,
I determined to arouse your sub-consciousness to the point where
you could remember. I need your help! You were a priest of the Race
once--you can be again! We will rule again, with the aid of the ancient
powers, supreme and undefeatable, over the entire world! Think, my
lord! Remember!"

Once again the witch-fires burned in his brain, rose and swirled and
fell, and when his brain revolted against the torture of their passage
his sight was cleared. All he could recall was the haunted underground
pit, dust-laden and befouled with cursed souls.

"I am Duar."

Shar sighed. "Go then, Duar. When you are reborn I will come again--and
again! Some day----" Her voice grew dim.

Heedless, he rushed up the stone stairs, in the direction no man had
ever trod, to where Nione waited in sobbing anxiety, up to where the
kingdom of Ygoth lay before his regal eyes. He knew she waited for him,
long before he saw her silhouetted against the moon as she placed a
hesitant foot on the first of the steps leading to the unknown depths.
Exultation flooded his heart. She had been willing to follow him to
a nameless death! What more could a barbarian wish than a powerful
kingdom and a beautiful Queen?

But there came a whisper to his ears as he emerged from the haunted
tower, a thin, ghostly strain from the echoes of his past:

"O Duar, you fool! You who could have possessed the world, taking but
one little kingdom for yourself!"





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DUAR THE ACCURSED ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous oneâthe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERGâ¢
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayâyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenbergâ¢ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase âProject
Gutenbergâ), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenbergâ¢ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. âProject Gutenbergâ is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (âthe
Foundationâ or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenbergâ¢ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenbergâ¢
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenbergâ¢ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenbergâ¢ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenbergâ¢ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenbergâ¢ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenbergâ¢ work (any work
on which the phrase âProject Gutenbergâ appears, or with which the
phrase âProject Gutenbergâ is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase âProject
Gutenbergâ associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenbergâ¢
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenbergâ¢ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenbergâ¢
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenbergâ¢.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenbergâ¢ work in a format
other than âPlain Vanilla ASCIIâ or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenbergâ¢ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original âPlain
Vanilla ASCIIâ or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenbergâ¢ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenbergâ¢ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works
provided that:

    â¢ You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenbergâ¢ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenbergâ¢ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, âInformation about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.â
    
    â¢ You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenbergâ¢
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenbergâ¢
        works.
    
    â¢ You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    â¢ You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenbergâ¢ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenbergâ¢ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain âDefects,â such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the âRight
of Replacement or Refundâ described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you âAS-ISâ, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenbergâ¢ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenbergâ¢ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenbergâ¢

Project Gutenbergâ¢ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergâ¢âs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenbergâ¢ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenbergâ¢ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundationâs EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your stateâs laws.

The Foundationâs business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundationâs website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenbergâ¢ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenbergâ¢ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenbergâ¢ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenbergâ¢,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


