The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Love That Prevailed
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Love That Prevailed

Author: Frank Frankfort Moore

Illustrator: Harry B. Matthews

Release date: May 2, 2016 [eBook #51971]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Widger from page images generously
        provided by the Internet Archive


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOVE THAT PREVAILED ***

THE LOVE THAT PREVAILED

By Frank Frankfort Moore

Author of “The Jessamy Bride,”

“I Forbid the Bans,”

“The Fatal Gift,” “The Millionaire,”

“Our Fair Daughter,” etc., etc.

Illustrated By H. B. Matthews

New York Empire Book Company Publishers

1907

[Illustration: 0001]

[Illustration: 0008]

[Illustration: 0009]


THE LOVE THAT PREVAILED




CHAPTER I

The old church ways be good enough for me,” said Miller Pendelly as
he placed on the table a capacious jug of cider, laying a friendly left
hand on the shoulder of Jake Pullsford, the carrier, as he bent across
the side of the settee with the high back.

“I ne'er could see aught that was helpful to the trade of a smith in
such biases as the Quakers, to name only one of the new-fangled sects,”
 said Hal Holmes, the blacksmith, shaking his head seriously. “So I holds
with Miller.”

“Ay, that's the way too many of ye esteems a religion--' Will it
put another crown in my pocket?' says you. If't puts a crown in your
pocket, 'tis a good enough religion; if 't puts half-a-crown in your
pocket, 'tis less good; if't puts naught in your pocket, that religion is
good for naught.”

The speaker was a middle-aged man with a pair of large eyes which seemed
to vary curiously in colour, sometimes appearing to be as grey as steel,
and again of a curious green that did not suit everybody's taste
in eyes. But for that matter, Jake Pullsford, the carrier, found it
impossible to meet everybody's taste in several other ways. He had a
habit of craning forward his head close to the face of anyone to whom he
was speaking, and this movement had something of an accusing air, about
it--occasionally a menacing air--which was distinctly distasteful to
most people, particularly those who knew that they had good reason to be
accused or to be menaced.

“Jake Pullsford goes about the world calling his best friends liars
without the intent to hurt their feelings,” was the criticism passed
upon him by Miller Pendelly. Other critics were not so sure on the
subject of his intent. He had never shown himself to be very careful of
the feelings of his friends.

“The religion that puts naught in thy pocket is good for naught--that's
what you be thinking of, Hal Holmes,” he said, thrusting his head close
to the face of the smith. But the smith did not mind. The man that
spends most of his days hammering out and bending iron to his will,
usually thinks good-naturedly of one who uses words and phrases as
arguments.

“I don't gainsay thee, Jake,” he replied. “If you know what's in my
thought better than I do myself, you be welcome to the knowledge.”

“I meant not thee in special, friend,” said Jake. “What I say is that
there are too many in these days that think of religion only for what it
may bring to them in daily life--folk that make a gain of godliness.”

“And a right good thing to make a gain of, says I,” remarked the miller
with a confidential wink into the empty mug which he held--it had been
full a moment before.

“Ay, you be honest, miller: you allow that I am right and you have
courage enough to praise what the Book condemns,” said Jake.

“Look'ee here, friend,” said the miller, in his usual loud voice--the
years that he had spent in his mill had caused him to acquire a voice
whose tone could successfully compete with the creaking and clattering
of the machinery. “Look'ee here, friend Jake, 'twould be easy enough for
you or me that has done moderate well for ourselves in life, to turn up
our eyes in holy horror at the bare thought of others being godly for
what they may gain in daily life, but for myself, I would not think that
I was broaching a false doctrine if I was to say to my son, 'Young
man, be godly and thou 'll find it to bring gain to thee.' What, Jake,
would 'ee have a man make gain out of ungodliness?”

“Ay, that's a poser for him, miller: I've been thinking for that
powerful proposal ever since the converse began,” said a small man who
had sat silently smoking in a high-backed chair. He was one who had
the aspect of unobtrusiveness, and a figure that somehow suggested to
strangers an apologetic intention without the courage ever to put it
in force. His name was Richard Pritchard, and he was by profession
a water-finder--a practitioner with the divining rod, but one whose
successes were never startling.

When he had spoken, all the room, to the number of three, turned anxious
eyes upon him, as if they were surprised at his having gone so far and
feared a painful sequel. He seemed to feel that he had justified their
worst forebodings, and hastened to relieve their minds.

“I'm all friendly, friends, and Jake in especial,” he said. “Don't
forget that though a man on the spur of the moment, and in the fierce
stress of argyment, may say a bitter hard word or two, there may still
be naught in his bosom's heart but neighbourly friendship, meaning no
offence to you, Jake, that be a travelled man, viewing strange cities
quite carelessly, where plain and simple men would gape and stare.”

Jake, the carrier, gave no sign of having heard the other speak.

“There's a many o' us in these parts as strong as in other parts, that
be ready and willing to take things as they come,” said he; “to take the
parson's preaching as they take the doctor's pills.”

“Ay, wi' a wry face,” acquiesced the blacksmith with a readiness that
one could see the carrier thought meant no good.

He leant across the table once more until his face was close to the
smith's, and said:

“That's where you be wrong, Hal Holmes. You know as well as the most
knowledgable----”

“Meaning yourself, Jake?” said the smith drily.

“You know well that though you may make a wry face when gulching down
the doctor's pill, ye dursn't so much as show a wrinkle or a crinkle on
your face when Parson Rodney is in his pulpit,” replied the carrier with
emphasis.

“'Cause why?” said the miller. “I'll tell ye truly--'tis because the
parson gives us no bitter pills, only----”

“That's what I've been leading up to,” cried the carrier triumphantly.
“The parson, like thousands of the rest of his cloth throughout the
length and breadth o' the land, is content to preach pleasant things
only, even as the false prophets of Israel prophesied fair things.”

“And why shouldn't he be content to preach pleasant things, friend Jake,
if so be that we be content to hear them? and for myself I would muchly
listen to an hour of pleasant things--ay, rather than half an hour of
unhappy ones.”

“Ah, miller, what would you say if the doctor, who, when he saw your
body suffering from a canker, gave you a sugar-plum and withheld his
knife from cutting out the plague spot because you were apt to be
squeamish at the sight of bloodletting!”

There was an uneasy pause when the carrier had asked this rehearsed
question. He asked it with a triumphant air, and, as if he felt it to be
too large a question to be answered by the miller singlehanded, he, as
it were, swept the whole company by a glance into his interrogation.

The water-finder made a motion with his hands as if trying to smooth
away an imaginary roughness in the air. There was a general feeling that
the carrier had triumphed in his argument. He was one of those people
who, by speaking in an air of triumph, succeed in making some people
believe that they have triumphed. The farmer shook his head with the
disinterestedness of an arbitrator. The smith continued looking into
the empty mug from which he had just drunk. The silence lasted several
seconds, and every second of course added to the triumph of the carrier.
The man was not, however, adroit enough to perceive this. He was
indiscreet enough to break the silence. When his eyes had gone round the
company they returned to the miller.

“Answer me that question, man!” he cried, and then everyone knew that
he had not triumphed: the last word had not been said.

“I'll answer you when you tell me if you wouldn't bear friendly feelings
for a doctor who gives you a sugar plum instead of blooding you when he
finds you reasonable well,” said the miller.

“'Tis when a man feels healthiest that he stands most in need of
blooding,” said Jake, not very readily and not very eagerly. “And so it
is in the health of the soul. 'Let him that thinketh he stand take heed
lest he fall.' Friends, is there one among us that can lay his hand
on his heart and say that he believes that our parsons do their duty
honestly and scripturally.”

“It took you a deal o' time to lead us up to that point: you'd best ha'
blurted it out at once,” remarked Hal Holmes.

“Nay, we all knew that it was a-coming,” said the farmer. “Since Jake
found himself as far away from home as Bristol city, he has never lost a
chance of a dig at the parsons.”

“I don't deny that my eyes were opened for the first time at Bristol,”
 said Jake. “Bristol was my Damascus, farmer.”

The farmer gave a jerk to his head, for the carrier had laid undue
emphasis upon the first syllable of the name.

“So bad as that?” he whispered.

The blacksmith laughed.

“Not so bad, farmer,” he said. “'Tis only our neighbour Jake that
compares himself with St. Paul, the Apostle.”

“I heard the profanity. He would ha' done better to abide at home,” said
the farmer severely.

The blacksmith laughed again.

“There fell, as it were, scales from my eyes when I heard preaching for
the first time--when I heard a parson for the first time,” resumed the
carrier, looking out of a window, and apparently unconscious of any of
the remarks of his friends. “Ay, 'twas for the first time, albeit I had
scarce missed church for a whole Sunday since I were a lad. That was
what struck me most, neighbours--that I could go Sunday after Sunday, in
good black cloth, too, and hear the holy service read, in a sort of way,
and the sacred psalms sung, while the fiddle and the double bass and the
viol made sweet music, and yet have no real and true yearning after the
truth, seems little short of a miracle, doesn't it?”

“Not when one knows that your heart was hard, Jake--ay, sir, it must ha'
been harder than steel,” said the blacksmith, shaking his head in mock
gravity.

“You scoff, smith, you scoff, I know; but you speak the truth
unwittingly,” said the carrier with some sadness. “My heart was like the
nether millstone--your pardon, miller, I meant not to say a word that
would cast a slight upon your calling: 'tis right for your nether
millstone to be hard.”

“The harder the better, and no offence, neighbour,” said the miller
generously.

“None was meant, sir,” said the carrier. “We were discoursing of my
heart--hard--hard. And I was a reader o' the Book all my life. That's
the strange thing; but I sought not to understand what I read and I got
no help from parson---no, nor yet from Archdeacon Eaton, that I listened
to twice--no, nor the Dean himself in his own Cathedral at Exeter.
With the new light that came to me, I was able to perceive that their
discourse was a vain thing--not helpful to a simple man who thought
something of himself, albeit jangling with the other tinkling cymbals
every Sunday, kneeling (on the knees of my body) when we called
ourselves miserable sinners. Miserable sinners! I tell ye, friends, I
gave no thought to the words. I slurred through the General Confession
at a hand gallop--just the pace that parson gets into when he warms to
his work.”

“There's few left of the cloth and none of the laity can pass parson
when he gets warmed to it. To hear him in the Litany is like watching
him go 'cross country when he be mounted on _King George_, his big
roan,” said the blacksmith reflectively.

“There's none rides straightlier,” said the farmer. “And there's no
better or steadier flyer than _King George_, first foal to my mare
_Majesty_. When I heard that parson had need of a flyer that was a
flyer, after poor _Gossip_ broke her neck at the Lyn and her master's
left arm, I held back, not being wishful to put myself for'ard, though
I knew what I knew, and knew that parson knew all I knew and maybe more;
but he got wind o' the foal, and then----”

“One at a time, farmer--one at a time is fair play between friends,”
 said the miller, nodding in the direction of Jake, who had suffered the
interruption very meekly.

“Your pardon, friend,” said the farmer. “Only 'twas yourself brought in
the parson's pace. For myself, I think all the better of the cloth that
rides straight to hounds.”

“'Miserable sinners,'” said the carrier, picking up the thread which he
had perforce dropped. “I tell ye, neighbours, that there's no need for
any parson, be he a plain Vicar or of high rank such as a Dean--nay,
a consecrated Bishop--no, I'm not going too far, miller--I say in cool
blood and in no ways excited, a consecrated Lord Bishop--I say that not
one of them need travel in discourse all his pulpit life, beyond that
text 'Miserable sinners.' That was his text--the one I heard at Bristol.
'Miserable sinners.' For the first time in my life I knew what the words
meant. I felt them--I felt them--words of fire--I tell ye that I
felt them burn into me. That was at first--when he began to preach; a
red-hot iron brand stinging me all over, and before he had done I felt
as if all my poor body had been seared over and over again with red-hot
letters that go to the spelling of '_miserable sinners_' You mind Joe
Warden's trial when we were lads, and how he was branded in the forehead
and right hand before he was sent to the pillory. He uttered neither cry
nor moan when the hot iron burst his skin----”

“I smell the smell o' 't in my nose this moment,” said the water-finder
gently. The farmer nodded.

“But the look that was on his face when he stood up there a marked man
forever!” cried the original speaker. “It told everyone that had eyes
what the man felt, and that was how I felt, multiplied an hundred fold,
when my preacher had done with me. I felt from the first that he had
singled out me--only me out of all that assembly, and when he had done
with me, I say that I could feel myself feeling as Joe Warden felt, the
rebel who suffered for slandering the King's Majesty.”

“'Tis no marvel that the man has had most of the church doors banged
in's face, if so be that he makes genteel churchgoers with ordinary
failings to feel so unwholesome,” remarked the smith.

“And so you comed away,” said the farmer. “Well, I wouldn't look back
on it as if I was satisfied. If I want that sort o' preaching I'll e'en
throw myself prone on my nine-acre field when the seed's in, and command
my man Job to pass the harrow o'er the pelt o' my poor carcase.”

“I've only told you of that part of his sermon that made one feel sore
and raw with hot wounds all over,” said Jake. “That was one part. I told
you not of the hand that poured soothing oil and precious ointment into
the wounds--that came after. And the oil was as holy soothing as what
ran down over Aaron's beard even unto the skirts of his garment, and
the ointment was as precious as Mary Magdalen's of spikenard--in the
alabaster box, whose odour filled the whole house. The whole life of me
became sweetened with the blessed words that fell from his lips. I felt
no longer the sting of the brand of the truth that had made me to tingle
all over. Oh, the dew of Hermon's holy hill was not more soothing than
the words of gracious comfort that came from him. I had a sense of being
healed and made whole. The joy of it! A cup of cold spring water when
one has toiled through a long hot harvest day. Oh, more than that.
The falling of a burden from off my shoulders like the great burden of
Christian, the Pilgrim; and then the joy--the confidence--the surety--I
cannot tell you how I felt--'tis over much for me, neighbours--over much
for me to attempt.”

“Say no more, Jake; you have made a good enough trial for such as us,”
 said the miller, laying his hand on the carrier's shoulder, and speaking
only after a long pause. The others of the party began to breathe again,
some of them very audibly.

The carrier's eyes were shining with an expression his friends had never
before seen them wear. He had been swept away by the force and fervour
of his words, and like one who has been breathing of a rarer atmosphere
than that of the plain, he gasped for several moments, and then there
was a sob in his throat. He went quickly to the door and, letting into
the room the sudden glow of a beautiful Spring sunset, he passed into
the open air, without speaking another word.




CHAPTER II

No one in the room had watched the man except in a furtive way, after
he had spoken, although while he was speaking every eye had been fixed
upon him. The sight of the effect of a great emotion makes some people
feel strangely abashed, and the miller and his friends were among such
persons. When the carrier had gone they remained silent for some time.
Each of them seemed to be thinking his thoughts.

“Poor Jake!” said the miller at last. “He was ever the sort of man that
would be like to have a twist, and he hath got one now. He's made us
forget the cider, lads. Blest if the jug has been touched since Jake
began his story! Hal, man, pass the jug to your neighbour.'Tis Jake that
should have swallowed a mouthful before he left: talking is drouthier
work than listening.”

The smith passed on the jug of cider without replenishing his own mug;
and then knocked the ashes out of the bowl of his pipe.

“I don't know that there's a deal in all this,” he remarked. “What do
you say, miller?”

“I don't say nought: I only looks on,” replied the miller cautiously.

“Ay, that may be,” said the smith. “We all know Jake. He never wronged
his fellow--nay, there's some of us knows that if the worst came to the
worst with us, Jake 'ud be the first to hold out a helping hand, with a
guinea or two in it, as the case may be. Still there may be something in
what he said about being brought to feel himself a miserable sinner.”

“He allowed that the preacher on'y kept him in that suspensory way o'
thought for a brief space,” said the miller.

“Ay, there's men that be mortal sinners, and for all that their luck
is tremendous and saves 'em from the eye of their fellow-men,” said the
smith.

“I feel bound to say this to the credit o' parson,” remarked the
water-finder with deprecatory suavity: “he never makes a simple
countryman feel himself to be a miserable sinner. He is of such a good
nature that he slurs over the General Confession so genteelly that I
defy the wickedest of his churchful to feel in any ways as if parson was
dictating the words to him.”

“That shows that parson's heart be in the right place,” nodded the
farmer. “He gives us all to understand at a glance that he reads the
words 'cause they are set down for him in the solemn prayer book, and
hopes that there's none among his hearers who will hold him responsible
as a man for their ungentility.”

“True, sir, true; parson's an am'able gentleman, always 'cepting when the
cock he has hatched from the noblest game strain fails him in the first
main,” said the blacksmith.

“And who is he that would be different, tell me that?” cried the miller,
who had fought a few cocks in the course of his life. “Ay, we be well
content wi' parson, we be so; but I don't say that if Jake's Bristol
preacher came within earshot I would refuse to listen to him--only out
o' curiosity--only out o' curiosity. But I do wonder much that a man
o' the steadiness o' Jake Pullsford owning himself overcome by a parson
that has no church of his own.”

“'Tis as humble as allowing a toothache to be cured by a quack at
a fair, when a wholesome Doctor of Physic, like Mr. Corballis, has
wrestled, with it for a whole week,” said the water-finder.

“I hope I haven't offended any friend by my homeliness when the talk was
serious,” he added, glancing around, not without apprehension.

No one took the trouble to say a word that might place him at his ease.
The farmer took a hasty drink out of his mug, and sighed after. The
blacksmith cut up some tobacco and rolled it between his palms. There
was a long silence in the room. It seemed as if the weakness which
Jake, the carrier, had displayed had saddened the little company. It was
pretty clear that they were all thinking of it.

“Hey, neighbours,” cried the miller at last, with a loud attempt to pull
his friends together. “Hey lads, what's amiss? These be doleful dumps
that have fallen on us. A plague on Jake and his quack preacher! Now, if
I'm not better satisfied than ever with parson may I fail to know firsts
from seconds by a sniff of the dust. Come, farmer, tell Hal what answer
you gave to Squire's young lady when she asked you if you made the cows
drink wine wouldn't they milk syllabub? He told me before you looked in,
Hal! Droll, it was surely. You'd never think that the farmer had it in
him.”

“Nay, nay,” said the farmer with a smile that broke up his face into
the semblance of a coloured diagram of the canals in Mars. “Nay, miller,
'twas on the spur o' the moment. I had no time to think o' some ready
reply that a young miss might think suitable to her station in life
coming from a humble yeoman that has no learning but of tillage.”

“I'll swear you'll esteem it neat as a sheep's tongue,” said the miller.
“Come, farmer, out with it, and don't force me to spoil it i' the
telling.”

“Oh, well----” began the farmer, pursing out his lips and assuming the
expression of one who is forced into a position of enviable prominence.

“Oh, well, 'twas o' Tuesday last--or was it Monday, miller?”

“You told me Monday,” replied the miller.

“Did I? Well, if I said Monday I sticks to it whatever may hap; for as
ye know me, friends, I don't go back on my word, even though I be wrong,
that being my way, so to speak, that came natural to me ever since poor
father said to me----”

But the revelation as to the terms of his father's discourse which had
produced so lasting an impression upon him, was not to be made at that
time; for before the slow farmer had spoken, the porch door was opened,
and there appeared against the background of the spring green side
of the little valley slope, the figure of a young girl, rather tall,
wearing a cloak by the lined hood of which her pretty face was framed.

“Hey,” cried the miller, “this be an improvement. After all we won't
need your story, farmer.”

“Your servant, Master Miller--gentlemen, I am your most obedient to
command now as ever,” said the girl, dropping a curtsey first to the
miller, then to his guests. “Oh, Master Hal, black but comely as usual,
and rather more idle than usual. And Farmer Pendelly, too--fresh as a
new-washed cherub on a tombstone. Master Pritchard, with his magic wand
up his sleeve, I doubt not. I didn't know that you was entertaining a
party, miller, or I--I----”

“Don't tell us that you would ha' tarried, Nelly; that would be to pay a
bad compliment to my company as well as to me,” said the miller.

“I was about to say that I would have hurried, not tarried. Maybe I'll
not tarry even now, in spite of the attractions you hold out, sir.”

While she spoke the girl conveyed the impression of making another
general curtsey to the company, though she had merely glanced around at
them with an inclusive smile. She made a pretty pretence of drawing
her cloak around her--she had thrown back the hood immediately after
entering the room--and made a movement towards the door.

“Don't you dare to think of fleeing, hussy,” said the miller. “If you
was to flee just now, there's not one of us here that wouldn't hale thee
back by the hair o' the head--and a nobler tow line couldn't be found.”

He had put his arms about her and patted her hair, which was the
lightest chestnut in colour, and shining like very fine unspun silk.

“Hey, Nelly, where did ye pick up that head of hair, anyway? All your
household be black as night,” he continued.

“Where's the puzzle, sir?” said she, without a suggestion of sauciness.
“I favour the night, too, only a moonlight night. My hair is the flash
o' moonlight.”

“The lass never was slack in speaking up for herself,” said the
blacksmith.

“True, friend Hal; but haven't I ever been moderate? Have I ever gone
even half-way to describe my own charms?” said the girl with a mock
seriousness that set everyone laughing--they roared when she looked at
them more seriously still, as if reproving their levity.

“I'll not stay here to be flouted,” she cried with a pout, giving the
miller a pat on the cheek. “Ah, here comes Sue to protect me. Dear Sue,
you come in good time. Tell these gentlemen that I haven't a red hair in
my head, and as for its being good only to make towing lines of----”

Here she broke down and fell sobbing into the arms of Susan Pendelly, a
girl of about her own age, who had entered the room by the door that
led to the parlour. For a few moments Susan was puzzled, for Nelly went
through her piece of acting extremely well, but the laughter of the
miller and the smith--the farmer and the water-finder were not quite
sure, so they remained solemn--quickly let her know that Nelly was up
to a prank, so she put her arms about her and pretended to soothe her,
calling the men ill-mannered wretches, and shaking her fist at them.
Susan was a little heavy and homely in her comedy.

“Towing line indeed!” she said, looking indignantly over Nelly's bowed
head at the men. “Towing line indeed! Why 'tis the loveliest hair in
Cornwall.”

“A towing line,” said her father, laughing. “A towing line that
has drawn more craft in its wake than any twenty-oared galley of a
man-o'-war. Oh, the poor fools that try to get a grip o' that towing
line! Let me count them. First there was Spanish Roderick----”

The girl lifted up her head from her friend's shoulder.

“Spanish Roderigo the first!” she cried. “Oh, miller, I did think that
my reputation was safe in your keeping! Why, sir, there were three after
me long before Roderigo showed his face at the Cove.”

“I ask your pardon, madam; I did you an injustice; you began the towing
business when you were twelve----”

“Ten, miller--ten, if you love me. You would not accuse a simple girl of
wasting her time.”

“Once again, your pardon, miss. I'll make it nine, if so be that you
wish.”

“I have no wish in the matter, sir. I'm nought but a simple country
wench with no wish but to be let live in peace.”

“Tell us how many lads are dangling after you at the present moment,
Nell--dangling like mackerel on the streamers?”

“How could I possibly tell, sir? Do you suppose that my father knows to
a fish how many mackerel are on his cast of streamers at any time? You
should have more sense, miller. The most that I can speak for is the
five that I angled for.”

“The impudence of the girl! She allows that she angled for five!”

“Miller, you would not have me treat them like trout and whip for them
with a rod and a single hook. Oh, no, sir, that would not be worth
the while. You see, miller, there are so many of them swimming
about--and--and--well, life is brief.”

“'Tis my belief, Nelly, that there's a hook on every hair of your head
and a foolish lad wriggling on it.”

“You compliment my fishing too highly, sir. If I thought that----”

“Well, what would happen if you thought that, madam?”

“Oh, well, I believe that I would e'en weave my hair into a reasonable
fishing-net to save time and a diffusion of wriggling. There now,
miller, we have had said the last word between us of this nonsense. I
know what I am, and you know what I am--a healthy, wholesome country
wench, that two or three lads think well of, and as many more think ill
of--they don't get distraught about me on the one hand, and they don't
have any particular enmity of me on the other hand. That's the way with
all girls, even such as are black-browed, and hard-voiced, which no one
has yet accused me of being, and I've walked seven miles from Porthawn
within the two hours to give you my father's message about Rowan's
corner, and when I've given it to you, I have to trudge back with a
six-pound bag of your best seconds to keep us from starvation for a day
or two.”

“You'll not trudge back before the morning if I have any say in the
matter,” cried the miller's daughter, catching up the other's cloak and
throwing it over one arm. “Come hither, Nelly, and we'll have a chat
in the parlour, like the well-to-do folk that we be; these men can have
this place to themselves till the time comes to lay out supper.”

“Supper! what good pixie made you say that word?” cried the other girl.
“If you hadn't said it it would have clean gone from my mind that I
brought with me a stale fish or two that was left over from our dinner
on Sunday week. What a memory I lack, to be sure!”

She picked up a rush basket which she had placed on the floor when she
was taking off her cloak, and handed it to Susan.

“You young rapparee!” said the miller. “Did it not cross your foolish
pate that a basket of fish a week old and more is fully capable of
betraying its presence without the need for a laboured memory?”

“I know that that basket betrayed its presence to me more than once as
it hung on my arm after the first three mile hither,” said the girl.

“As I live'tis a seven-pound pink salmon, and 'twas swimming in the sea
at noon this day,” said Susan when she had opened the basket.

“She must ha' heard that we were supping at the mill this eve'n, and
that I was of the company,” said the blacksmith. “Mistress Polwhele, my
respects to you!”

“Nay, Master Hal, had I known that you were to be of the company, the
salmon would ha' been a fifteen-pounder at least--that is if I wanted
any of the others to have a mouthful,” laughed the girl.

She was out of the room before the blacksmith had ceased rattling his
chair in his pretence of rising to carry out the menace he made with his
fist when she was speaking.

The miller and his guests watched in silence the door through which she
had gone.

“A bit of a change from Jake Pullsford, eh, friends!” remarked Hal.

“That's what we needed sorely,” said the miller.




CHAPTER III

Life did not seem to be strenuous in the valley of the Lana, seven
miles from the fishing village of Porthawn, and thirty from Falmouth,
when the eighteenth century still wanted more than ten years of
completing its first half. To be sure, the high road to Plymouth was
not so very far away, and coaches with passengers and luggage flew daily
across the little bridge of the Lana at the rate sometimes of as much as
nine miles an hour; and the consciousness of this made the people of the
village of Ruthallion think rather well of themselves--so at least
the dwellers in the more remote parts of the region were accustomed to
affirm. The generous were ready to allow that the most humble-minded
of people would think well of themselves if they were so favourably
situated in regard to the great world as to be able to get news from
London only a few days old, simply by waiting at the turn of the
Plymouth road until a coach came up.

But of this privilege the people of that most scattered of all Cornish
villages, Ruthallion, did not avail themselves to any marked extent,
except upon occasions of great national importance; such as the
achievement of a victory by King George's army in the Low Countries,
or by the King's ships in the West Indies. In the latter case the news
usually came from the Plymouth side of the high road. For the sober
discussion of such news in all its bearings, it was understood that the
Lana Mill, situated as it was in the valley within a few hundred yards
of the village, and having a little causeway off the Porthawn road all
to itself, occupied a most favourable position. There was no inn with a
well-lighted bar-parlour within four miles of the place, and the miller
was hospitable. He was said to be the inheritor of an important secret
in regard to the making of cider, and it was no secret that his autumnal
brew had a flavour that was unsurpassed by any cider produced in
Cornwall, or (as some people said) in the very apple-core of Devonshire
itself.

Miller Pendelly was known to be a warm man in more senses than one.
He had not only a considerable amount of property apart from the mill,
which the unfailing waters of the Lana fed; he was a warm-hearted man,
though one of the most discreet that could be imagined. When it was a
charity to give, he gave freely, but he showed himself to be well aware
of the fact that sometimes charity consists in withholding one's hand.
He was not a man that could be easily imposed upon; though, like all
shrewd people, he allowed three or four ne'er-do-wells to borrow from
him--_once_. He talked of every such case with great bitterness on his
tongue, but with a twinkle in his eye that assured his confidants that
he knew what he was about. To rid the neighbourhood of an idle youth who
was robbing an easy-going father, was surely worth the disbursement of
five guineas; and the expatriation of a hard-drinking husband was not
dear at six.

He, himself, was a good husband to a good wife, and the father of a
girl, who, though well favoured, was discreet--a girl who loved her home
and all it contained better than she did any possible lover.

The miller's friends were just equal in number to the inhabitants of the
valley and of the villages of Porthawn and Ruthallion. Even the mother
of the worthless youth who had disappeared with the five guineas, and
the wife of the bibulous husband who had not returned after contracting
his loan of six, became, in the course of time, his friends, and almost
forgave him for his exercise of generosity. But among his neighbours
there were none whom he met on such friendly terms as those to whom he
turned with a side-nod of his head when the girls had gone.

“They may spare their breath who would tell me that the ill-favoured
ones are the best daughters,” said he.

“I'll not be the first to advance that doctrine to the father of Susan
Pendelly,” said the blacksmith.

The miller laughed.

“Sue was not in my thought,” he cried--“at least not when I spoke,
though thinking of her now only makes me stronger in my opinion.'Twas
the sight of t'other lass. Merry she be and with a sharp enough tongue,
but was there ever a better daughter than Nelly Polwhele, tell me that,
Hal?”

“A fine salmon fish it be surely,” said the blacksmith. “Seven pounds,
I'll wager, if 'tis an ounce.”

“Out upon thee for a curmudgeon,” shouted the miller, giving the
blacksmith a push of a vehemence so friendly that he with difficulty
retained his place on the settee.

“'Tis a mortal pity that so spirited a mare foal will be tamed sooner
or later--that's the way with all female flesh whether well-favoured or
black-a-vised,” remarked the farmer..

Richard Pritchard, who was the only single man present, shook his head
with as great a show of gravity as if he had spent his life taming
spirited things.

His arrogance aroused his host.

“And what are you that gives yourself airs, my man?” he cried. “What
call has a worm of a bachelor to let his tongue wag on a matter that
might well make owdacious fathers o' families keep dead silence? Richard
Pritchard, my good man, this talk is not for such as thee. Thou beest
a middling silent man by nature, Dick, and for that thou shouldst be
thankful when wild words be flying abroad on household matters.”

“I allow that I went too far, neighbour, though I call all to witness
that I did not open my mouth to speak,” said the water-finder, with
great humility.

“You are aye over daring, though never all through immoral, Dick,” said
the blacksmith gravely.

“I allow that I earned reproof, friend,” said Richard.' “We all be
human, and many have frail thought of high language, and a proud heart
at the hope of wisdom and ancient learning. But I take reproof with no
ill-feeling.”

The miller roared at the success of his jest.

“Richard Pritchard, if I didn't know you for a brave Welshman, I would
take you for a Dorset dairyman that's so used to the touch o' butter
they say it wouldn't melt in their mouths,” he cried when he found
breath.

At this point Mistress Pendelly bustled into the room, which was not the
kitchen, but only a sort of business-room of the mill, with the message
that supper would not be ready so soon as she could wish; the salmon
steaks took their own time to cook, she affirmed, and expressed the hope
that her friends would be able to hold out for another half hour.

“Make no excuses, mother,” said her husband. “Why, good wife, the very
sound of the frizzling will keep us alive in hope, and the smell that
creeps through the crevices of the kitchen door is nigh as satisfying as
a full meal in itself.”

“Speak for yourself if you are so minded, miller,” cried Hal Holmes.
“Sup off the sound of a frizzle mixed with the sniff of a well-greased
pan, if you so please, but give me a flake or two o' salmon flesh, good
mother, the pink o' the body just showing through the silver o' the
scales. Oh, a lady born is your sea salmon with her pink complexion
shining among the folds o' her silver lace!”

“Ay, sir, better than that your praise should be, for the fish's beauty
is more than skin deep,” said the housewife, as she stood with the
kitchen door half open.

The miller winked at his friends when she had disappeared.

“Canst better that, Hal?” he enquired.

“Vanity to try,” replied the blacksmith. “A man's good enough maybe for
the catching o' a salmon, but it needs a woman's deft fingers to cook
it. You see through my proverb, miller?”

“It needs no spying glass, Hal,” said the miller. “The interpretation
thereof is in purpose that it needs a woman's nimble wit to put a
finishing touch to a simple man's discourse, howsoever well meant it may
be. Eh, farmer?”

“'Tis different wi' pilchards, as is only natural, seeing what sort of
eating they be,” said the farmer shrewdly; he found that he had been
wittier than he had any notion of being, and he added his loudest
chuckles (when he had recovered from his surprise) to the roaring of the
miller's laughter.

It was Nelly Polwhele who demanded to be let into the secret of the
merriment so soon as she had returned to the room with Susan, and when
the miller told her, with an illuminating wink and a shrewd nod, she
laughed in so musical a note with her hands uplifted that the farmer
pursed out his lips in pride at his own wit. He was not without a hope
that he might find out, in the course of the evening, wherein the point
of it lay.

Meantime Nelly was looking anxiously around the room.

“What's gone wrong wi' the girl?” said the miller. “Oh, I see how things
be: 'tis so long since she was here the place seems strange to her. Is't
not so, Nelly?”

“Partly, sir,” replied the girl. “But mainly I was looking to see where
Mr. Pullsford was hiding. You can't be supping in good style and he
absent.”

“Give no heed to Mr. Pullsford, whether he be here or not; spend your
time in telling us where you yourself have been hiding for the past
month,” cried the miller.

“She has not been hiding, she has been doing just the
opposite--displaying herself to the fashionable world,” said Susan.

“Hey, what's all this?” said the miller. “You don't mean to tell us that
you've been as far as Plymouth?”

“Plymouth, indeed! Prithee, where's the rank and fashion at Plymouth,
sir?” cried Nelly. “Nay, sir, 'tis to the Bath I have been, as befits one
in my station in life.”

“The Bath?--never,” exclaimed the miller, while the girl, lifting up her
dress with a dainty finger and thumb to the extent of an inch or
two, went mincing past him down the room, followed by the eyes of the
blacksmith and the others of the party. “'Tis in jest you speak, you
young baggage--how would such as you ever get as far as the Bath?”

“It sounds like a fancy freak, doth it not truly; and yet 'tis the sober
truth,” said Nelly. “At the Bath I was, and there I kept for a full
month, in the very centre core of all the grandest that the world has in
store. I didn't find myself a bit out of place, I protest.”

“Hear the girl!” exclaimed the miller. “She talks with the cold
assurance of a lady of quality--not that I ever did meet with one to
know; but--and the fun of it is that she wouldn't be out of place in the
most extravagant company. Come, then, tell us how it came about. Who was
it kidnapped thee?”

And then the girl told how it was that Squire Trelawny's young ladies
at Court Royal, having lost their maid, owing to her marrying in haste,
asked her to take the young woman's place for a month or two until they
should get suited. As she had always been a favourite with them, she had
consented, and they had forthwith set out for the Bath with the Squire's
retinue of chariots and horsemen, and there they had sojourned for a
month.

“'Tis, indeed, like a story o' pixies and their magic and the like,”
 said the miller. “I knew that the young ladies and you was ever on the
best o' terms, but who could tell that it would come to such as this?
And I'll wager my life that within a day and a night you could tire
their hair and dust it wi' powder with the best of their ladyships'
ladies. And, prithee, what saw you at the Bath besides the flunkies o'
the quality?”

“Oh, sir, ask me not to relate to you all that I saw and noted,” said
the girl. “Every day of my life I said, 'What a place the world is to be
sure!'”

“And so it be,” said the farmer approvingly.

“Oh, the rank and fashion, farmer, such as would astonish even you, and
you are a travelled man,” said she.

“Ay, I have been as wide afield as Falmouth on the west and Weymouth on
the east,” said the farmer. “Ay, I know the world.”

“Your travels have ever been the talk of the six parishes, sir,” said
the girl. “But among all the strange people that have come-under your
eyes, I'll warrant you there was none stranger than you might find at
the Bath. Have you ever in your travels crossed ladies sitting upright
in stumpy sentry boxes with a stout fellow bearing it along the streets,
winging 'twixt the pair o' poles?”

“Naught so curious truly; but I've seen honest and honourable men that
had heard of such like,” said the farmer.

“And to think that I saw them with these eyes, and link boys, when there
was no moon, and concerts of music in the Cave of Harmony, night by
night, and two gentlemen fighting in a field--this was by chance, and
my lady passing in a chariot sent forth a shriek, so that one pistol
exploded before its time, and the bullet graded a peaceful gentleman,
who they said was a doctor of physic coming quick across the meadow,
scenting a fee!”

“Pity is 'twasn't a lawyer. I hoard the thought that in case o' a
fight 'twixt friends, the lawyers hurry up as well as the doctors in hope
of a job,” said the miller. “Well, you've seen the world a deal for one
so young, Nelly,” he added.

“And the concerts of singing and the assemblies and the beautiful polite
dance which they call the minuet were as nought when placed alongside
the plays in the playhouse,” cried Nelly.

The miller became grave.

“There be some who see a wicked evil in going to the playhouse,” he
remarked, with a more casual air than was easy to him.

“That I have heard,” said the girl.

“They say that a part o' the playhouse is called the pit,” suggested the
farmer. “Ay, I saw the name over the door at Plymouth, as it maybe did
you, miller.”

“And some jumped at the notion that that pit led to another of a
bottomless sort?” said the girl. “Well, I don't say that'twas the
remembrance of that only that drew me to the playhouse. I did get
something of a shock, I allow, when my young ladies bade me attend them
to the playhouse one night, but while I sought a fair excuse for 'biding
at our lodging on the Mall, I found myself inventing excuses for obeying
my orders, and I must say that I found it a good deal easier doing this
than t'other.”

“Ay, ay, I doubt not that--oh, no, we doubt it not,” cried the miller,
shaking his head.

Richard Pritchard shook his head also.

“I found myself saying, 'How can the playhouse be a place of evil when my
good young ladies, who are all that is virtuous, find it a pleasure to
go?'”

The miller shook his head more doubtfully than before.

“I think that you left the service of your young ladies in good time,”
 muttered the miller.

“Do not dare to say a word against them--against even Mistress Alice,
who, I allow, hath a tantrum now and again, when the seamstress fails
her in time or mode,” said the girl. “Of course when I reflected that
I was but a servant, so to speak, and that my duty was to obey my
mistresses, I would hesitate no longer. Duty is a virtue, sir, so I
submitted without a complaint.”

“Ay, you would do that,” murmured the blacksmith.

“I said to myself----”

“Oh,” groaned the miller.

Nelly ignored the groan. She went on demurely from where she was
interrupted.

“I said to myself, 'Should there be evil in it none can hold me
blameworthy, since I was only obeying the order of them that were set
over me.' I went and I was glad that I went, for I saw no evil in word
or act.”

“I'm grieved to hear it, Nelly,” said the miller.

“What, you are grieved to hear that I saw nothing of evil? Oh, sir!”

“I mean that I don't like to think of a girl like thee in such a place,
Nelly. But let's make the best of a bad matter and recount to us what
you saw. It may be that by good fortune we may be able to find out the
evil of it, so that you may shun it in future.”

“Alack, I fear the chance will not come to me in the future,” said Nelly
mournfully.

“I trust not. Who was the actor that night, do you mind?” asked the
miller.

“Her name was Mistress Woffington, and now I mind that one of my ladies
said that Mr. Long had told her that Mistress Woffington had been to
dinner with the learned provost of Dublin College in Ireland--a parson
and a scholar.”

“Oh, an Irishman!” was the comment of the miller.

“Let the girl be, miller,” said Hal Holmes. “She's making a brave fight
in the way of excusing herself. Go thy gait, Nell; give us a taste of
the quality of this Mistress Woffington.”

“Oh, Hal, she is a beauty--I never thought that the world held such. The
finest ladies of quality at the Bath, though they all copy her in her
mode, are not fit to hold a candle to her. And her clothing and her
modesty withal. They say she does the modest parts best of all.”

“Ay, I've heard that the likes of her are best in parts that have the
least in common with themselves,” murmured the miller.

“Oh, to see her when she vowed that she would be true to her lover
albeit that her ancient father, stamping about with a cudgel and a
mighty wig, had promised her to a foolish fellow in yellow silk and an
eyeglass with a long handle, and a foppish way of snuff-taking and a
cambric handkerchief! La! how the lady made a fool of him under his
very nose. This is Mistress Woffington: 'I protest, Sir, that I am but
a simple girl, country bred, that is ready to sink into the earth at the
approach of so dangerous a gentleman as your lordship.' And she make a
little face at her true lover, who is getting very impatient, in blue
and silver, at the other side of the room. 'Stap my vitals, madam,'
lisps the jessamy, dangling his cane in this fashion--you should see
them do it on the Mall--” She picked up a light broom that lay at the
side of the hearth and made a very pretty swagger across the room with
her body bent and her elbow raised in imitation of the exquisite of the
period, quite unknown to Cornwall. “'Egad, my dear, for a country wench
you are not without favour. To be sure, you lack the mode of the _haut
ton_, but that will come to you in time if you only watch me--that is,
to a certain extent. My lady, the Duchess says, “Charles is inimitable.”
 Ah, her Grace is a sad flatterer, 'fore Gad, but she sometimes speaks the
truth.' 'What, Sir,' says the lady, 'do you think that in time I should
catch some of your grand air? I beseech you, Sir, have pity on a poor
simple maiden; do not raise false hopes in her breast.' 'Nay, pretty
charmer, I do not dare to affirm that you will ever quite catch the full
style--the air of breeding, so to speak; but you may still catch----'
'the smallpox, and faith, I think I would prefer it to him,' says Mrs.
Woffington in a whisper, that all in the playhouse can hear. 'Eh, what's
that?' lisps Mr. Floppington. 'Oh, sir, I was just saying that I fear
I am sickening for the smallpox, which runs in our family as does the
gout, only a deal faster.' 'Eh, what, what! keep away from me, girl,
keep away, I tell you.' He retreats with uplifted hands; she follows
him, with her own clasped, imploring him not to reject her. He waves his
cane in front of her as if she was a bull ready to toss him. They both
speak together, they run round the table, he springs upon the table, she
tilts it over--down he goes crying, 'Murder--murder--stop her--hold her
back!' He is on his feet again, his fine coat torn in half at the back.
She catches at it and one whole side rips off in-her hand. He makes for
the window--finds it too high to jump from--rushes to the door and down
goes the lady's father, who is in the act of entering, with a bump, and
down goes the fop with the half coat in the other direction. The lady
sits drumming with her heels on the floor between them in a shrieking
faint--thus!”

She flung herself into a chair and her shrieks sounded shrill above the
laughter of the others.

Suddenly the laughter came to an abrupt end, as though it were cut in
twain with a sharp knife. The girl continued for a few seconds shrieking
and rapping her heels on the floor, her head thrown back; then she
clearly became aware of the fact that something unusual had occurred.
She looked up in surprise at the men on the settee, followed the
direction of their eyes, and saw standing at the porch door a man of
medium stature, wearing a long riding cloak and carrying a book in one
hand. The doorway framed him. The dimness of the shadowy eventide made a
background for his head, the candle which Susan had lighted in the room
shone upon his face, revealing the thin, refined features of a man who
was no longer young. His face was sweetness made visible--eyes that
looked in brotherly trustfulness into the eyes of others, and that,
consequently, drew trust from others--illimitable trust.

The girl stared at the stranger who had appeared in the doorway with
such suddenness; and she saw what manner of man he was. There was an
expression of mild surprise on his face while he looked at her, the
central figure in the room; but she saw that there was a gentle smile
about his eyes.

“I hope that I am not an intruder upon your gaiety,” said the stranger.
“I knocked twice at the door, and then, hearing the shrieks of distress,
I ventured to enter. I hoped to be of some assistance--shrieks mixed
with laughter--well, I have stopped both.”

The miller was on his feet in a moment.

“Foolery, sir, girl's foolery all!” he said, going towards the stranger.
“Pray, enter, if you can be persuaded that you are not entering a Bedlam
mad-house.”

“Nay, sir,” said the newcomer. “'Twould be foolish to condemn simply
because I do not understand. I am a stranger to this county of England;
I have had no chance of becoming familiar with your pastimes. Dear
child, forgive me if I broke in upon your merriment,” he added, turning
to Nelly; “Good sir,”--he was now facing the miller--“I have ridden
close upon thirty miles to-day--the last four in the want of a shoe; my
horse must have cast it in the quagmire between the low hills. Yours
was the first light that I saw--I was in hopes that it came from a
blacksmith's forge.”

The miller laughed.

“'Tis better than that, good sir,” said he. “The truth is that the smith
of these parts is a fellow not to be trusted by travellers: his forge
is black tonight, unless his apprentices are better men than he. He is a
huge eater of salmon and divers dainties, and he will drink as much as a
mugful of cider before the night is past.”

“But he is a fellow that is ready to sacrifice a cut of salmon and a
gallon of cider to earn a sixpence for a shoe, sir,” said Hal Holmes,
rising from the settee and giving himself a shake. “In short, sir, I
be Holmes, the smith, whose lewd character has been notified to your
honour, and if you trust me with your nag, I'll promise you to fit a
shoe on him within the half-hour.”

The stranger looked from the smith to the miller, and back again to the
smith, and his smile broadened.

“Good neighbours both, I can see,” he said. “I thank you, smith. How far
is it to Porthawn, pray, and what may this placed be called?”

Before he could be answered the door opened and Jake Pullsford entered
the room. The sound of his entrance caused the stranger to turn his
head. Jake gave an exclamation of surprise.

“Mr. Wesley!” he said in a whisper that had something of awe in its
tone. “Mr. Wesley! How is this possible? I have spent the afternoon
talking of you, sir.”

At the sound of the name the miller glanced meaningly at the smith. They
were plainly surprised.

“Well, my brother,” said Mr. Wesley, “I ask nothing better than to give
you the chance of talking to me for the next hour. I remember you well.
You are Jake Pullsford, who came to see me a month ago at Bristol. You
have been much in my thoughts--in my prayers.”




CHAPTER IV

Jake was so excited at finding himself by a curious accident once
more face to face with the man who, as he had happily confessed to his
friends, had produced so great an impression upon him as to change the
whole course of his life, that he began to talk to him in his usual
rapid way, as though Mr. Wesley and himself were the only persons in the
room.

The miller remained on his feet. The blacksmith was also on his feet. He
had assumed a professional air. After all, he was likely to be the most
important person present. The girl in the chair remained with her hands
folded on her lap. She had the aspect of a schoolgirl who has broken out
of bounds and awaits an interview with the schoolmistress. She had heard
during her visit to Bath of this Mr. Wesley and his views--at least such
views as were attributed to him by the fashionable folk who assembled to
have their gossip and intrigue flavoured by the sulphur of the waters.
He was not so easy-going as the clergymen at Bath. She could not doubt
that he would esteem it his duty to lecture her on her levity. It was
known that he abhorred playgoing. He was naturally abhorred by the
players. They had the best of reasons: when he was preaching in any town
that had a theatre, the players remained with empty pockets.

The appearance of Mrs. Pendelly announcing that supper was ready was a
great relief to her.

She jumped up with alacrity. Jake Pullsford came back to earth. He was
breathing hard. The visitor had signified his intention of resuming his
journey, if his horse could be shod. Jake was entreating him to pass the
night at his house, only a mile up the valley.

The miller was beginning to feel awkward. He was hospitably inclined,
but he was not presumptuous. The blacksmith was fast losing his
professional bearing; a sniff of the salmon steaks had come through the
open door.

It was the visitor whose tact made the situation easy for everyone.

“Sir,” he said to the miller, “I have arrived here so opportunely for
myself that I will not even go through the pretence of offering to go to
the wayside inn, which our good friend Jake Pullsford tells me is some
miles away. I know that I can throw myself on your hospitality and that
you would feel affronted if I hurried on. I have no mind to do so--to be
more exact, I should say no stomach.”

“Sir, if your reverence will honour my house I can promise you a
wholesome victual,” said the miller. “Even if you was not a friend o'
my friend Jake here, who might, I think, have named my name in your ear,
you would still be welcome.”.

“I know it, sir,” said Wesley, offering the miller his hand. “I thank
you on behalf of myself and my good partner whose bridle I hung over
your ring-post. A feed of oats will put new spirit in him in spite of
the loss of his shoe.”

“The horse shall be seen to, Mr. Wesley. Susan, the stable bell,” said
the miller, and his daughter set a bell jangling on the gable wall.

“Again my thanks, good friend,” said Wesley.

“May I beg your leave to be presented to my fellow-guests at your table,
sir?”

He shook hands with the farmer, the water-finder and the smith, saying a
word to each. Then he turned to where the two young women had been.

They had fled through the open door, Nelly having been the one to judge
of the exact moment for flight.

They appeared at the supper table, however, but not taking their seats
until they had waited upon all the others of the party. That was the
patriarchal custom of the time. Nelly Polwhele only wished that the
severe discipline of a side table for the serving girls had been in
force at the Mill. Remote from the long oak table on which generations
of her family had dined, she might have had a pleasant chat with her
friend Susan, and then steal off, evading the lecture which she felt was
impending from the strict Mr. Wesley. As it was, the most she could do
for herself was to choose an unobtrusive place at the further end from
the clergyman.

She hoped that the excellence of the salmon which she had carried
through the valley of the Lana would induce him to refrain from asking
any questions in regard to the game that was being played at the moment
of his entrance.

But Mr. Wesley was vigilant. He espied her before he had finished his
salmon, and had expressed his thanks to her for having burdened herself
with it. It was his thirst for information of all sorts that had caused
him to enquire how it was possible to have for supper a fish that must
have been swimming in the sea, or at least in a salmon river, which the
Lana was not, a few hours before. Was not Porthawn the nearest fishing
village, and it was six miles away? Then it was that Mrs. Pendelly had
told him of Nelly's journey on foot bearing her father's gift to his
friend the miller.

“I should like to have a word or two with you, my dear,” said Mr. Wesley
when he had thanked her. “I wish to learn something of the people of
Porthawn. I am on my way thither to preach, and I like to learn as much
as is possible of the people who, I hope, will hear what I have to say
to them.”

Nelly blushed and tried to say that she was afraid she could tell him
nothing that he could not learn from any other source--that was what was
on her mind--but somehow her voice failed her. She murmured something;
became incoherent, and then ate her salmon at a furious rate.

The miller, although he had felt bound to offer hospitality to the
stranger who had appeared at his door, knew that his other guests--with
the exception, it might be, of Jake Pullsford--would feel, as he himself
did, that the presence of this austere clergyman would interfere with
their good fellowship at supper and afterwards. He and his associates
knew one another with an intimacy that had been maturing for thirty
years, and the sudden coming of a stranger among them could not but
cause a certain reserve in the natural freedom of their intercourse.

The miller had a constant fear that this Mr. Wesley would in the course
of the evening say something bitter about the parsons who hunted and
bred game-cocks and fought them, laying money on their heads--on parsons
who lived away from their parishes, allowing indifferent curates to
conduct the services of the church--of parsons who boasted of being able
to drink the Squires under the table. The miller had no confidence in
his power of keeping silent when he felt that the parson with whom
he was on the easiest of terms and for whose gamecocks he prepared
a special mixture of stiffening grain food was being attacked by a
stranger, so he rather regretted that his duty compelled him to invite
Mr. Wesley, of whom he, in common with thousands of the people of the
West country, had heard a great deal, to supper on this particular
evening.

But in the course of the meal he began to think that he would have no
reason to put any restraint upon himself. He soon became aware of the
fact that this Reverend John Wesley was not altogether the austere
controversialist which rumour, becoming more and more exaggerated as it
travelled West, made him out to be. Before supper was over he had come
to the conclusion that Parson Rodney as a companion could not hold a
candle to this Mr. Wesley.

The compliment in respect of the salmon had pleased both the miller and
his wife, even though it had made Nell blush; and then a bantering
word or two was said to Hal Holmes and his fine taste for salmon, and
forthwith Mr. Wesley was giving an animated account of how he had seen
the Indians in Georgia spearing for salmon on one of the rivers. This
power of bringing a wide scene before one's eyes in a moment by the use
of an illuminating word or two was something quite new to the miller and
his friends; but it was the special gift of his latest guest. With
thin uplifted forefinger--it had the aspect as well as the power of a
wizard's wand--he seemed to draw the whole picture in the air before
the eyes of all at the table--the roar of the rapids whose name with its
Indian inflections was in itself a romance--the steathily moving red
men with their tomahawks and arrows and long spears--the enormous
backwoods--one of them alone half the size of England and Wales--the
strange notes of the bird--whip-poor-will, the settlers called
it--moonlight over all--moonlight that was like a thin white sheet let
down from heaven to cover the earth; and where this silver wonder showed
the white billows of foam churned up by the swirl of the mad river,
there was the gleam of torches--from a distance they looked like the
fierce red eyes of the wild beasts of the backwood; but coming close one
could see deep down at the foot of the rapids the flash of a blood-red
scimitar--the quick reflection in the passionate surface of the water of
the red flare that waved among the rocks. Then there was a sudden splash
and a flash--another scimitar--this time of silver scattering diamonds
through the moonlight--another flash like a thin beam of light--the fish
was transfixed in mid-air by the Indian spear!

They saw it all. The scene was brought before their eyes. They sat
breathless around the supper table. And yet the man who had this magic
of voice and eye had never once raised that voice of his--had never once
made a gesture except by the uplifting of his finger.

“Fishing--that is fishing!” said Hal Holmes. “I should like----”

The finger was upraised in front of him.

“You must not so much as think of it, my friend! It would be called
poaching on our rivers here,” said Mr. Wesley with a smile.

“Then I should like to live in the land where the fish of the rivers,
the deer of the forests, the birds of the air are free, as it was
intended they should be--free to all men who had skill and craft--I
have heard of the trappers,” said Hal. “It seems no sort of life for a
wholesome man to live--pulling the string of a bellows, hammering iron
into shoes, for plough-horses!--no life whatsoever.” Wesley smiled.

“Ah, if you but knew aught of the terror of the backwoods,” said he. “If
you but knew of it--one vast terror--monstrous--incredible. A terror by
day and by night. I was used to stand on one of the hills hard by our
little settlement, and look out upon the woods whose skirts I could see
in the far distance, and think of their immensity and their mystery.
Hundreds of miles you might travel through those trackless forests
until the hundreds grew into thousands--at last you would come upon-the
prairie--hundred and hundreds of miles of savage country--a mighty ocean
rolling on to the foot of the Rocky Mountains! Between the backwoods-and
the mountains roll the Mississippi River--the Ohio, the Potomac. Would
you know what the Mississippi is like? Take the Thames and the Severn
and the Wye and the Tyne and the Humber--let them roll their combined
volume down the one river bed; the result would be no more than an
insignificant tributary of the Mother of Waters--the meaning of the name
Mississippi.”

There was more breathlessness. When Hal Holmes broke the silence
everyone was startled--everyone stared at him.

“Grand! grand!” he said in a whisper. “And your eyes beheld that wonder
of waters, sir?”

Mr. Wesley held up both his hands.

“I--I--behold it?” he cried. “Why, there is no one in England whose eyes
have looked upon that great river. Had I set out to find it I should
have had to travel for a whole year before reaching it--a year, even if
the forests had opened their arms to receive me, and the prairie had
offered me a path I spoke with an Indian who had seen it, and I spoke
with the widows of two men who had gone in search for it. Four years had
passed without tidings of those men, and then one of the Iroquois tribe
found a tattered hat that had belonged to one of them, on the borders of
the backwoods, not a hundred miles from his starting place. Of the other
nothing has yet been forthcoming. I tell you, friends, that I was used
to let my eyes wander across the plain until they saw that forest, and
they never saw it without forcing me to look upon it as a vast,
monstrous thing--but a living creature--one of those fabled dragons that
were said to lie in wait to devour poor wretches that drew nigh to it.
Nay, when I looked upon it I recalled the very striking lines in John
Milton's fine epic of 'Paradise Lost':

               'With head uplift above the wave, and eyes

               That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides

               Prone on the flood, extended long and large,

               Lay floating many a rood,--”

“One must needs be a dweller among the adventurers in America in order
to understand in its fulness how terrible a monster those backwoods
are thought to be. There it stretched, that awful mass--that monstrous
mother of that venomous brood--the huge snakes that lurk in the
undergrowth, the fierce lynx, the terrible panther, the wolf and the
wildcat. I have heard, too, of a certain dragon and the vampire--a
huge bat that fans a poor wretch asleep by the gentle winnowing of its
leather wings only to drain his life's blood. These are but a few of the
brood of the backwoods. Who can name them all? The poisonous plants that
shoot out seeds with the noise of the discharge of a musket, the
swamps made up of the decay of a thousand years--breathing fevers and
agues--the spectre of starvation lurks there unless you have weapons and
the skill to use them--fire--they told me of the prairie fires--a blast
of flame five miles broad--sometimes twenty miles broad--rushing along
driving before it beasts and birds until they drop in sheer exhaustion
and become cinders in a minute--these are some of the terrors that dwell
in the backwoods, but worst of all--most fierce--inexorable, is the Red
Indian. Tongue of man cannot tell the story of their treachery--their
torturings. Our settlers do not fear to face the beasts of the
backwoods--the rattlesnakes--the pestilence of the swamps--the most
cruel of these is more merciful than the Indian.”

They listened as children listen to a fairy tale, and they knew that
they were hearing the truth. There was not one of them that had not
heard something of the story of the founding of the settlement along the
coast of the new Continent, from the Bay Colonies and Plymouth Rock in
the North to Carolina in the South. The spirit of adventure which had
given Drake and Raleigh their crews from the men of the West country
gave no signs of dying out among their descendants. They listened
and were held in thrall while this man, who had come among them with
something of the reputation of a pioneer--a man boldly striking out a
new track for himself, told them of the perils faced by their countrymen
on the other side of that sea which almost rolled to their very doors.
He carried them away with him. They breathed with him the perfume of the
backwoods and became imbued with the spirit of mystery pervading them.
He carried them away simply because he himself was carried away. He felt
all that he spoke about; this was the secret of his power. He could not
have made them feel strongly unless by feeling strongly himself.

But his aim was not limited to his desire to arouse their interest in
the romance of the backwoods. He spoke of the troubles of the young
settlement to which he had gone out, of the bravery of the settlers,
men and women--of the steadfast hope which animated them in facing their
anxieties--their dangers. What was the power that sustained them? In one
word, it was faith.

Without the least suggestion of preaching, he talked to them of Faith.
He talked as if it was not merely a sentiment--a cold doctrine to be
discussed by the aid of logic--nay, but as a real Power--a Power that
could move mountains. Such as had it had the greatest gift that Heaven
offered to mankind. It was a gift that was offered freely--all could
have it, if they so willed; and this being so, how great would be the
condemnation of those who refused to accept it!

And the people who had eagerly drunk in all that he had to say of the
mystery of the backwoods were even more interested when he talked of
this other mystery. There had been no dividing line in his subject;
the Faith of which he was now speaking with all the eloquence of
simple language that fell like soft music on their ears, was a natural
part--the most actual part of his story of the great half-known West.

They listened to him while he discoursed for that marvellous half-hour,
and the prayer that followed seemed also a part--the suitable closing
part of that story of trial and trouble and danger rendered impotent by
Faith. Surely, when such a gift could be had for the asking, they should
ask for it. He prayed that the hearts of all who were kneeling might be
opened to receive that saving grace of Faith.

“Hal, my friend,” said the miller, when they stood together at the
entrance to the lane, having seen Mr. Wesley drive off with Jake. “Hal,
for the first time these sixteen years I have seen thee rise from thy
supper without searching about for thy pipe!”

“My pipe? List, old friend, while I tell thee that to pass another such
evening I would break my pipe into a hundred pieces and never draw a
whiff of 'bacca between my teeth,” said Hal. “Moreover, a word in thy ear:
I would not have it made public; I'll smoke no more 'bacca that comes
to me by a back way. I believe that why I didn't smoke this evening was
by reason of the feeling that was in me that 'twould be a solemn sin for
me to let him have even a sniff of 'bacca that had been run.”

The miller laughed.

“Why, Hal, he did not preach to us to give the Preventive men their
due,” he said.

“No, no. If he had I might ha' been the less disposed to do the right
thing. But now--well, no more smuggled 'bacca for me.”

“Good:--good--but wherefore this honest resolve, Hal Holmes?”

“I know not. Only I seem somehow to look at some things in a new light.”

“And that light will not let your tinder be fired over a pipe o' 'bacca
that has paid no duty? That's right enough, but what I need to learn
from you is the reason of all this.”

“Ah, there you have me, friend. I can give you no reason for it; only
the notion came over me quite sudden like, that for ten year I had been
doing what I should ha' turned from, and I made the resolve now to turn
now before it was too late. That's all, and so, good-night to you, Mat,
and God bless you. I be to get that shoe on before he starts from Jake's
house i' the morn, and he said he would start betimes.”

The miller laughed again, but very gently, and held out his hand to the
other without a word. It was not until the blacksmith had disappeared
down the lane that his friend said in a low voice:

“It beats me clean. There must be a sort of magic in the man's tongue
that it works those wonders. All the time that he was telling us his
story o' the woods I was making up my mind to be a better man--to have
more charity at heart for my fellows--to be easier on such as cannot pay
all that they have promised to pay. And now here's Hal that confesses
to the same, albeit he has never gone further out of the straight track
than to puff a pipe that has paid nothing to King George's purse. And
the man gave no preacher's admonition to us, but only talked o' the
forest and such-like wild things.... Now, how did he manage to bring
Faith into such a simple discourse?... Oh, 'tis his tongue that has
the magic in it! Magic, I say; for how did it come that when he spoke I
found myself gazing like a child at a picture--a solid, bright picture
o' woods and things?... Oh, 'tis true magic, this--true!”




CHAPTER V

Oh, that a man could speak to men in the language of the Spring!” cried
Mr. Wesley, when his horse stopped unbidden and unchidden and looked
over the curved green roof of the hedge across the broad green pasturage
beyond. “Oh, that my lips could speak that language which every ear
can understand and every heart feel! What shall it profit a man to
understand if he does not feel--feel--feel? The man who understands is
the one who holds in his hand the doctor's prescription. The man who
feels is the one who grasps the healing herbs; and 'tis the Spring that
yields these for all to gather who will.”

And then, automatically he took his feet out of the stirrups for greater
ease, and his eyes gazed across the meadow-land which sloped gently
upward to the woods where the sunbeams were snared among the endless
network of the boughs, for the season was not advanced far enough
to make the foliage dense; the leaves were still thin and
transparent--shavings of translucent emerald--a shade without being
shadowy.

Everything that he saw was a symbol to him. He looked straight into the
face of Nature herself and saw in each of its features something of the
Great Message to man with which his own heart was filled to overflowing.
He was a poet whose imagination saw beneath the surface of everything.
He was a physician who could put his finger upon the pulse of Nature and
feel from its faintest flutter the mighty heart which throbbed through
the whole creation.

What man was there that failed to understand the message of Nature as
he understood it? He could not believe that any should be so dense as to
misinterpret it. It was not a book written in a strange tongue; it was a
book made up of an infinite number of pictures, full of colour that any
child could appreciate, even though it had never learned to read. There
was the meadow beyond the hedgerow. It was full of herbs, bitter as well
as sweet. Could anyone doubt that these were the symbols of the Truth;
herbs for the healing of the nations, and if some of them were bitter to
the taste, were their curative properties the less on this account? Nay,
everyone knew that the bitterest herbs were oftentimes the most healing.
What a symbol of the Truth! It was not the dulcet truths that were
purifying to the soul of man, but the harsh and unpalatable.

“God do so to me and more also if ever I should become an unfaithful
physician and offer to the poor souls of men only those Truths that
taste sweet in their mouths and that smell grateful to their nostrils!”
 he cried.

And he did not forget himself in the tumult of his thought upon his
message. He was not the physician who looked on himself as standing in
no need of healing.

“I have tasted of the bitter medicine myself and know what is its power.
Oh, may I be given grace to welcome it again should my soul stand in
need of it!”

A lark rose from the grass of the sloping meadow and began its ecstatic
song as it climbed its ærie ladder upward to the pure blue. He listened
to the quivering notes--a bubbling spring of melody babbling and
wimpling and gurgling and flitting and fluttering as it fell through the
sweet morning air.

“Oh, marvel of liquid melody!” cried the man, letting his eyes soar
with the soaring bird. “What is the message that is thine! What is that
message which fills thy heart with joy and sends thee soaring out of the
sight of man, enraptured to the sky? Is it a message from the sons of
men that thou bear-est to the heavens? Is it a message from Heaven that
thou sendest down to earth?”

A butterfly fluttered up from beyond the hedge, carrying with it the
delicate scent of unseen primroses. It hovered over the moss of the bank
for a moment and then allowed itself to be blown like a brown leaf in
the breeze in a fantastic course toward the group of harebells that made
a faint blue mist over a yard of meadow.

He watched its flight. The butterfly had once been taken as an emblem of
the immortality of the soul, he remembered. Was it right that it should
be thought such a symbol, he wondered. In latter years it was looked on
as an example of all that is fickle and frivolous. Was it possible that
the ancients saw more deeply into the heart of things--more deeply into
the spirit of these forms of Nature?

“Who can say what wise purpose of the Creator that gaudy insect may
fulfil in the course of its brief existence?” said he. “We know that
nothing had been made in vain. It may be that it flutters from flower to
flower under no impulse of its own, but guided by the Master of Nature,
whose great design would not be complete without its existence. That
which we in our ignorance regard as an emblem of all that is vain and
light may, in truth, be working out one of the gravest purposes of the
All Wise.”

He remained under the influence of this train of thought for some time.
Then his horse gave a little start that brought back his rider from the
realm into which he had been borne by his imagination. He caught up the
rein, slipped his feet into his stirrups, and perceived that it was the
fluttering dress of a girl, who had apparently sprung from the primrose
hollow beyond the hedge, that had startled the animal. It seemed that
the girl herself was also startled; she stood a dozen yards away, with
her lips parted, and gave signs of flight a moment before he recognised
her as one of the girls who had been at the Mill the night before--the
girl who had been the central figure in the game which his entrance had
interrupted.

“Another butterfly--another butterfly!” he said aloud, raising his hand
to salute Nelly Polwhele, who dropped him a curtsey with a faint reply
to his “Good-morning.”

He pushed his horse closer to her, saying:

“A fair morning to you, my child! You are not a slug-a-bed. Have you
come for the gathering of mushrooms or primroses? Not the latter; the
borders of the Mill stream must be strewn with them to-day.”

“I am on my way to my home, sir,” she replied. “I set out on my return
to the village an hour ago. I should be back in less than another--'tis
scarce four mile onward.”

“I remember that you told me you had come from Porthawn--my destination
also. I wished for a chat with you, but somehow we drifted a long
way from Porthawn--we drifted across the Atlantic and got lost in the
backwoods of America.”

“Ah, no, sir, not lost,” said the girl.

“I was a poor guide,” said he. “I have only had a glimpse of the
backwoods, and so could only lead you all a rood or two beyond their
fringes of maple. The true guide is one that hath been on every forest
track and can tell by the tinges on the tree trunk in what direction
his feet tend. What a pity 'tis, my dear, that we cannot be so guided
through this great tangled forest of life that we are travers-. ing now
on to the place of light that is far beyond--a place where there is no
darkness--a shelter but no shadow! There, you see, I begin to preach to
the first person whom I overtake. That is the way of the man who feels
laid upon him the command to preach.”

“It does not sound like preaching, sir,” said the girl. “I would not
tire listening to words like that.”

“That is how you know preaching from--well, from what is not preaching:
you tire of the one, not of the other?” said he, smiling down at her.

She hung her head. Somehow in the presence of this man all her readiness
of speech--sharpness of reply--seemed to vanish.

“I do not say that you have not made a very honest and a very excellent
attempt to convey to me what is the impression of many people,” he
resumed. “But there is a form of preaching of which you can never grow
weary. I have been listening to it since our good friend Hal Holmes
helped me to mount the horse that he had just shod.”

“Preaching, sir?” she said. “There are not many preachers hereabouts.
Parson Rodney gives us a good ten minutes on Sunday, but he does not
trouble us on week-days.”

“Doth his preaching trouble you on Sunday, child? If so, I think more
highly of your parson than I should be disposed to think, seeing that
I have heard nothing about him save that he is the best judge of
a game-cock in Cornwall. But the sermon that makes a listener feel
troubled in spirit is wholesome. Ah, never mind that. I tell you that
I have been listening to sermons all this lovely morning--the sermon of
that eminent preacher, the sun, to the exhortation of the fields, the
homily of the bursting flowers, the psalm of the soaring lark, the
parable of the butterfly. I was thinking upon the butterfly when you
appeared.”

“You are different from Parson Rodney, if it please you, sir.”

“It does please me, my child; but, indeed, I am sure that there are
worse parsons than those who take part in the homely sports of their
parish, rude though some of these sports may be. I wonder if your ears
are open to the speech--the divine music of such a morn as this.”

“I love the morning, sir--the smell of the flowers and the meadows--the
lilt of the birds.”

“You have felt that they bring gladness into our life? I knew that your
child's heart would respond to their language--they speak to the heart
of such as you. And for myself, my thought when I found myself drinking
in of all the sweet things in earth and air and sky--drinking of that
overflowing chalice which the morning offered to me--my thought--my
yearning was for such a voice as that which I heard come from everything
about me on this Spring morning. 'Oh, that a man might speak to men in
the language of this morn!' I cried.”

There was a long pause. His eyes were looking far away from her. He
seemed to forget that he was addressing anyone.

She, however, had not taken her eyes off his face. She saw the light
that came into it while he was speaking, and she was silent. It seemed
to her to speak just then would have been as unseemly as to interrupt at
one's prayers.

But in another moment he was looking at her.

“You surely are one of the sweet and innocent things of this dewy morn,”
 said he. “And surely you live as do they to the glory of God. Surely you
were meant to join in creation's hymn of glory to the Creator!”

She bent her head and then shook it.

“Nay,” said he, “you will not be the sole creature to remain dumb while
the Creator is revealing Himself in the reanimation of His world after
the dark days of Winter, when the icy finger which touched everything
seemed to be the finger of Death!”

His voice had not the inflection of a preacher's. She did not feel as if
he were reading her a homily that needed no answer.

But what answer could she make? She was, indeed, so much a part of the
things of Nature that, like them, she could only utter what was in
her heart. And what was in her heart except a consciousness of her own
unworthiness?

“Ah, sir,” she murmured, “only last night had I for the first time a
sense of what I should be.”

His face lit up again when she spoke. His hands clasped, mechanically as
it seemed.

“I knew it,” he said in a low voice, turning away his head. “I was
assured of it. When my horse cast his shoe I felt that it was no
mischance. I heard the voice of a little child calling to me through the
night. No doubt crossed my mind. I thank Thee--I thank Thee abundantly,
O my Master!”

Then he turned to Nelly, saying:

“Child, my child, we are going the same way. Will you give me permission
to walk by your side for the sake of company?”

“Nay, sir, will not you be weary a-walking?” she said. “'Tis a good
three mile to the Port, and the road is rough when we leave the valley.”

“Three miles are not much,” said he, dismounting. “The distance will
seem as nothing when we begin to talk.”

“Indeed that is so, sir,” said she. “Last night fled on wings while you
were telling us the story of the backwoods.”

“It fled so fast that I had no time to fulfil my promise to ask you
about your friends at Port-hawn,” said he. “That is why I am glad of
the opportunity offered to me this morning. I am anxious to become
acquainted with all sorts and conditions of people. Now, if I were to
meet one of your neighbours to-day I should start conversation by asking
him about you. But is there any reason why you should not tell me about
yourself?”

She laughed, as they set out together, Mr. Wesley looping his horse's
bridle over his arm.

“There is naught to be told about myself, sir; I am only the daughter of
a fisherman at Porthawn. I am the least important person in the world.”

“'Tis not safe, my child, to assign relative degrees of importance to
people whom we meet,” said he. “The most seemingly insignificant is very
precious in the sight of the Master. Who can say that the humblest of
men or women may not be called upon some day to fulfil a great purpose?
Have you read history? A very little knowledge of history will be enough
to bear out what I say. When the Master calls He does not restrict
Himself to the important folk; He says to the humblest,
'Follow Me and do My work--the work for which I have chosen thee.' God
forbid that I should look on any of God's creatures as of no account.
What is in my thought just now is this: How does it come that you, who
are, as you have told me, the daughter of a fisherman in a small village
far removed from any large city--how does it come that you speak as a
person of education and some refinement? Should I be right to assume
that all the folk at your village are as you in speech and bearing?”

The little flush of vanity that came to her face when he had put his
question to her lasted but a few seconds.

She shook her head.

“I have had such advantages--I do not know if you would look on them
as advantages, sir; but the truth is that the Squire's lady and her
daughters, have been kind to me. My father did the Squire a service a
long time ago. His son, Master Anthony, was carried out to sea in his
pleasure boat and there was a great gale. My father was the only man who
ventured forth at the risk of his life to save the young gentleman, and
he saved him. They were two days in the channel in an open boat, and
my father was well-nigh dead himself through exhaustion. But the young
squire was brought back without hurt. The Squire and his lady never
forgot that service. My father was given money to carry out the plans
that he had long cherished of making the port the foremost one for
fishing on our coast, and the ladies had me taught by their own
governess, so that I was at the Court well nigh every day. I know not
whether or not it was a real kindness.”

“It was no real kindness if you were thereby made discontented with your
home and your friends.”

“Yes, Mr. Wesley; that is just what came about. I thought myself a deal
better than anyone in the village--nay, than my own father and mother.
I had a scorn of those of my neighbours who were ignorant of books and
music and the working of embroidery, and other things that I learned
with the young ladies. I was unhappy myself, and I knew that I made
others unhappy.”

“Ah, such things have happened before. But you seemed on good terms with
the miller's family and the others who supped last evening at the Mill.
And did not you walk all the way from your village carrying that heavy
fish for their entertainment?--our entertainment, I may say, for I was
benefited with the others.”

The girl turned her head away; she seemed somewhat disturbed in her
mind. She did not reply at once, and it was in a low voice that she said:
“A year ago I--I--was brought to see that--that--I cannot tell you
exactly how it came about, sir; 'tis enough for me to say that something
happened that made me feel I was at heart no different from my own folk,
though I had played the organ at church many times when Mr. Havlings was
sick and though the young ladies made much of me.”

Mr. Wesley did not smile. He was greatly interested in the story which
the girl had told to him. Had she told him only the first part he
would have been able to supply the sequel out of his own experience and
knowledge of life. Here was this girl, possessing the charms of youth
and vivacity, indiscreetly educated, as people would say, “above her
station,” and without an opportunity of mingling on equal terms with
any except her own people--how should she be otherwise than dissatisfied
with her life? How could she fail to make herself disagreeable to the
homely, unambitious folk with whom she was forced to associate?

He had too much delicacy to ask her how it was that she had been brought
to see the mistake that she had made in thinking slightingly of her
own kin who remained in ignorance of the accomplishments which she
had acquired? He had no difficulty in supplying the details which she
omitted. He could see this poor, unhappy girl being so carried away by
a sense of her own superiority to her natural surroundings as to presume
upon the good nature of her patrons, the result being humiliation to
herself.

“I sympathise with you with all my heart, dear child,” he said. “But the
lesson which you have had is the most important in your education--the
most important in the strengthening of your character, making you see,
I doubt not, that the simple virtues are worthy of being held in far
higher esteem than the mere graces of life. Your father would shake his
head over a boat that was beautifully painted and gilded from stem to
stern. Would he be satisfied, do you think, to go to sea in such a craft
on the strength of its gold leaf? Would he not first satisfy himself
that the painted timbers were made of stout wood? 'Tis not the paint
or the gilding that makes a trustworthy boat, but the timber that is
beneath. So it is not education nor graceful accomplishments that
are most valuable to a man or woman, but integrity, steadfastness of
purpose, content These are the virtues that tend to happiness. Above
all, the most highly cultivated man or woman is he or she that has
cultivated simplicity. I thank you for telling me your story in answer
to my enquiry. And now that you have satisfied my curiosity on this
point, it may be that you will go so far as to let me know why it was
that you were filling the room in the Mill with shrieks last evening
when I entered.”




CHAPTER VI

Nelly Polwhele gave a little jump when Mr. Wesley had spoken. It had
come at last. She had done her best to steal away from the explanation
which she feared she would have to make to him. But somehow she did
not now dread facing it so greatly as she had done in the Mill. She had
heard that the Reverend Mr. Wesley was severe, as well as austere. She
had heard his Methodism mocked by the fashionable folk at Bath, story
after story being told of his daring in rebuking the frivolities of the
day. She had believed him to be an unsympathetic curmudgeon of a man,
whose mission it was to banish every joy from life.

But now that she had heard his voice, so full of gentleness--now that
his eyes had rested upon her in kindliness and sympathy--now that she
had heard him not disdain to spend an hour telling her and her friends
that romance of the backwoods, thrilling them by his telling of it, her
dread of being rebuked by him for her levity was certainly a good deal
less than it had been. Still she looked uneasily away from him, and
they had taken a good many steps in silence together before she made an
attempt to answer him. And even then she did not look at him.

“'Twas a piece of folly, I am afraid, sir,” she said in a low tone. “At
least you may esteem it folly, though it did not fail to amuse the
good people at the Mill,” she added in an impulse of vanity not to be
resisted.

“I had no doubt that it was a domestic game,” said he. “They were all
roaring with laughter. Had you heard, as I did, from without, the loud
laughter of the men and above it the wild, shrill shrieks, you would, I
am sure, have been as amazed as I was.”

She laughed now quite without restraint.

“Bedlam--Bedlam--nothing less than Bedlam it must have seemed to you,
Mr. Wesley,” she said.

“I will not contend with you as to the appropriateness of your
description,” said he, smiling, still kindly.

“The truth is, sir, that I have just returned from paying my first visit
to the Bath,” said she. “'Twas the greatest event in my simple life. I
went to act as dresser to the Squire's young ladies, and they were so
good as to allow me to see mostly all that there was to be seen, and to
hear all that there was to be heard.”

“What--all? That were a perilous permission that your young ladies gave
to you.”

“I know not what is meant by all, but I heard much, sir; singers and
preachers and players. I was taken to the Cave of Harmony for lovely
music, and to the playhouse, where I saw Mistress Woffington in one of
her merry parts. I was busy telling of this when you entered the Mill. I
was doing my best to shriek like Mistress Woffington.”

She spoke lightly and with a certain assurance, as though she were
determined to uphold her claim to go whithersoever she pleased.

She was in a manner disappointed that he did not at once show himself to
be shocked. But he heard her and remained silent himself. Some moments
passed; but still he did not speak; he waited.

Of course she began to excuse herself; he knew that she would do so. The
uneasily confident way in which she had talked of the playhouse had told
him that she would soon be accusing herself by her excuses without the
need for him to open his lips.

“You will understand, sir, I doubt not, that I was but in the position
of a servant, though my ladies treated me graciously; I could not but
obey them in all matters,” she said.

“Does your saying that mean that you had some reluctance in going to the
playhouse?” he asked her.

“I was not quite--quite--sure,” she replied slowly. “I had heard that
the playhouse was a wicked place.”

“And therefore you were interested in it--is that so?”

“But I asked myself, 'Would my young ladies go to the playhouse--would
the Squire, who surely knows a good deal about wickedness, having lived
for so many years in London--would the Squire and his lady allow them to
go to the playhouse if there was anything evil in it?'”

“And so you went and you were delighted with the painted faces on both
sides of the stage, and you have remained unsettled ever since, so that
you must needs do your best to imitate an actress whose shamelessness of
living is in everybody's mouth? I know that you imitated this Woffington
woman to your young ladies when you returned warm and excited from the
playhouse, and they laughed hugely at your skill.”

Nelly stood still, so startled was she at the divination of her
companion.

“How came you to hear that?” she cried.

“Were we not alone in the bedroom? Who could have told you so much?”

“And when you returned to your home you were not many hours under its
roof before you were strutting about feeling yourself to be decked
out in the fine clothes which you had seen that woman wear in the
playhouse?”

“You have been talking to someone--was it Jake Pullsford? But how could
he have known? Oh, sir; you seem to have in yourself a power equal to
that of the water-finder's wand, only surer by a good measure.”

“And you saw no evil in the playhouse?” he said gently.

“I do not want to go again, Mr. Wesley,” she said. “But indeed I dare
not say that I saw any of the wickedness that I have heard of, in the
theatre.”

“What, are you not in yourself an example of the evil?” said he.

“What--I, sir? Surely not, Mr. Wesley. Whatever you may have heard you
could hear nothing against me,” she cried, somewhat indignantly.

Her indignation lent her boldness and she turned to him, saying:

“I affirm, sir, and I am not ashamed to do so, that I saw nothing of
evil in the playhouse, and I made up my mind that instead of spending my
days hidden away in a lonely village far from all the pleasures of life,
I would try my fortune as an actress. I believe that I have some gift
of mimicry--my ladies told me so. Why, sir, you allowed that my shrieks
frightened you outside the Mill.”

“Child, your feet are on a path perilous,” said he. “You were indignant
when I said that you were in yourself an example of the evil of going to
the playhouse. Every word that you have spoken since has gone to prove
the truth of my assertion. Do you say that the unsettling of your mind
is no evil due to your visits to the playhouse--the unsettling of your
mind, the discontent at your homely and virtuous surroundings, the
arousing of a foolish vanity in your heart and the determination to
take a step that would mean inevitable ruin to such as you--ruin and the
breaking of your father's heart?”

He spoke calmly, and in his voice there was more than a suggestion of
sorrow.

She had become pale; she made an attempt to face him and repel his
accusations, but there was something in his face that took all the
strength out of her. She covered her face with her hands and sobbed
bitterly. He watched her for some moments, and then he put a soothing
hand upon her arm.

“Nay, dear child, be not overcome,” said he. “Have you not said to me
that you have no wish ever to enter the playhouse again? Let that be
enough. Be assured that I will not upbraid you for your possession of
that innocence which saved you from seeing aught that was wrong in
the play or the players. Unto the pure all things are pure. Unto the
innocent all things are harmless. You were born for the glory of God. If
you let that be your thought day and night your feet will be kept in the
narrow way.”

She caught his hand and held it in both her own hands.

“I give you my promise,” she cried, her eyes upon his face; they were
shining all the more brightly through her tears.

“Nay, there is no need for you to give me any promise,” he said. “I will
have confidence in your fidelity without any promise.”

“You will have to reckon with me first, you robber!”

[Illustration: 0008]

They both started at the sound of the voice. It came from a scowling man
who, unperceived by them, had come through a small plantation of poplars
on the slope at one side of the road, and now leaped from the bank, high
though it was, and stood confronting them.

The girl faced him.

“What do you here, John Bennet?” she cried. “Have you been playing the
spy as usual?”

“You are one of them that needs to be watched, my girl,” said he.
“You know that I speak the truth and that is why you feel it the more
bitterly. But rest sure that I shall watch you and watch you and watch
you while I have eyes in my head.”

He was a lank man, who wore his own red hair tied in a queue. He had
eyes that certainly would make anyone feel that the threat which he had
uttered to the girl was one that he was well qualified to carry out;
they were small and fierce--the eyes of a fox when its vigilance is
overstrained.

He kept these eyes fixed upon her for some moments, and then turned them
with the quickness of a flash of light upon Wesley.

“I heard what she said and I heard what you said, my gentleman,”
 said he. “You will have faith in her fidelity--the fidelity of Nelly
Polwhele. I know not who you are that wears a parson's bands; but parson
or no parson I make bold to tell you that you are a fool--the biggest
fool on earth if you have faith in any promise made by that young
woman.”

“Sir,” said Wesley, “you called me a thief just now. My knowledge of the
falsehood of that accusation enables me to disregard any slander that
you may utter against this innocent girl.”

“I called you a thief once and I shall call you so a second time,” cried
the man. “You have stolen the love of this girl from me--nay, 'tis no use
for you to raise your hand like that. I know you are ready to swear
that you said nothing except what a good pastor would say to one of his
flock--swear it, swear it and perjure yourself, as usual--all of your
cloth do it when the Bishop lays his hands upon their wigs, and they
swear to devote their lives to the souls of their parishes and then
hasten to their rectories to get on their hunting boots--their hunting
boots that are never off their legs save when they are playing bowls or
kneeling--kneeling--ay, in the cock-pit.”

“Silence, sir!” cried Wesley. “Pass on your way and allow us to proceed
on ours.”

“I have told your reverence some home truths; and as for yonder girl,
who has doubtless tricked you as she did me----”

“Silence, sir, this instant! You were coward enough to insult a man who
you knew could not chastise you, and now you would slander a girl! There
is your way, sir; ours is in the other direction.”

He had his eyes fixed on the man's eyes, and as he faced him he pointed
with his riding whip down the road. The man stared at him, and then
Nelly saw all the fierceness go out of his eyes. He retreated slowly
from Mr. Wesley, as though he were under the influence of a force upon
which he had not previously reckoned. Once he put his hands quickly up
to his face, as if to brush aside something that was oppressing him.
His jaw fell, and although he was plainly trying to speak, no words came
from his parted lips. With a slow indrawing of his breath he followed
with his eyes the direction indicated by the other's riding whip. A
horseman was trotting toward them, but in the distance.

Then it was that the man recovered his power of speech.

“You saw him coming--that emboldened you!” he said. “Don't fancy that
because I was a bit dazed that 'twas you who got the better of me. I'll
have speech with you anon, and if you still have faith in that girl----”

The sound of the clattering hoofs down the road became more distinct.
The man took another quick glance in the direction of the sound, and
then with an oath turned and leapt up to the green bank beside him. He
scrambled up to the top and at once disappeared among the trees.

Wesley and the girl stood watching him, and when he had disappeared
their eyes took the direction that the man's had taken. A gentleman,
splendidly mounted on a roan, with half a dozen dogs--a couple of sleek
spaniels, a rough sheep dog and three terriers--at his heels, trotted
up. Seeing the girl, he pulled up.

“Hillo, Nelly girl!” he cried cheerily, when she had dropped him a
curtsey. “Hillo! Who was he that slunk away among the trees?”

“'Twas only John Bennet, if you please, parson,” said she.

“It doth not please me,” said he. “The fellow is only fit for a madhouse
or the county gaol. He looked, so far as I could see, as if he was
threatening you or--I ask your pardon, sir; your horse hid you.”

When he had pulled up Mr. Wesley had been on the off side of his horse
and half a dozen yards apart from the girl; so that the stranger had no
chance of seeing the bands that showed him to be a clergyman.

“You arrived opportunely, sir,” he said. “I fear if the man had not
perceived you coming in the distance, we might have found ourselves in
trouble.”

“What, did the fellow threaten you? Shall I set the dogs upon his
track? Say the word and I'll wager you _King George_ against your sorry
skewbald that he'll find himself in trouble before many minutes are
over,” cried the stranger.

“Nay, sir; the man hath gone and we are unharmed,” said Wesley.

“The scoundrel! Let me but get him within reach of my whip!” said the
other. “But the truth is, Nelly, that the fellow is more than half
demented through his love for you. And i' faith, I don't blame him. Ah,
a sad puss you are, Nelly. There will not be a whole heart in the Port
if you do not marry some of your admirers.”

Then he turned to Wesley, saying:

“You are a brother parson, sir, I perceive, though I do not call your
face to mind. Are you on your way to take some duty--maybe 'tis for Josh
Hilliard; I heard that he had a touch of his old enemy. But now that I
think on't 'twould not be like Josh to provide a substitute.”

“I have come hither without having a church to preach in, sir; my name
is Wesley, John Wesley.”

“What, the head of the men we christened Methodists at Oxford?”

“The same, sir. I believe that the name hath acquired a very honourable
significance since those days. I hope that we are all good churchmen, at
any rate.”

“I don't doubt it, Mr. Wesley; but you will not preach in my church,
sir, of that you may rest assured.”

“You are frank, sir; but pray remember that I have not yet asked your
permission to do so.”

The other laughed, and spoke a word or two to his horse, who was
becoming impatient and was only controlled with difficulty.

“A fair retort, Mr. Wesley--a fair retort, sir,” he said. “I like your
spirit; and by my word, I have a sort of covert admiration for you. I
hear that none can resist your preaching--not even a Bishop. You have
my hearty sympathy and good will, sir, but I will not go to hear you
preach. The truth is that you are too persuasive, Mr. Wesley, and I
cannot afford to be persuaded to follow your example. I find the Church
a very snug nest for a younger son with simple country tastes and a
rare knowledge of whist; I am a practical man, sir, and my advice upon
occasion has healed many a feud between neighbours. I know a good horse
and I ride straight to hounds. In the cockpit my umpiring is as good law
as the Attorney General could construe for a fee of a thousand guineas.
Ask anyone in this county what is his opinion of Parson Rodney and
you will hear the truth as I have told it to you. I wish you luck, Mr.
Wesley, but I will not countenance your preaching in my church; nor will
I hear you, lest I should be led by you to reform my ways, as I suppose
you would say; I am a younger son, and a younger son cannot afford to
have doubts on the existing state of things, when the living that he
inherits is of the net value of eight hundred pounds per annum. So fare
you well, sir, and I beg of you not to make my flock too discontented
with my ten-minute sermons. They should not be so, seeing that my
sermons are not mine; but for the most part Doctor Tillotson's--an
excellent divine, sir--sound--sound and not above the heads of our
gaffers. Fare thee well, Nelly; break as few hearts as thy vanity can do
with.”

And Parson Rodney, smiling gallantly, and waving his whip gracefully,
whistled to his dogs, and put his roan to the trot for which he was
eager.

“An excellent type,” murmured Wesley. “Alas! but too good a type. Plain,
honest, a gentleman; but no zeal, no sense of his responsibility for the
welfare of the souls entrusted to his keeping.”

He stood for some time watching the man on the thoroughbred. Then he
turned to Nelly Polwhele, saying:

“We were interrupted in our pleasant chat; but we have still three miles
to go. Tell me what the people think of Parson Rodney.”

“They do not think aught about him, Mr. Wesley; they all like him: he
never preaches longer than ten minutes.”

“A right good reason for their liking of him--as good a reason as he had
for liking the Church; it doth not exact overmuch from him, and it saves
him from sponging on his friends. The Church of England has ever been an
indulgent mother.”




CHAPTER VII

Such a sight had never been seen in Cornwall before: on this Sunday
morning an hour after sunrise every road leading to the village of
Porthawn had its procession of men, women, and children, going to hear
the preacher. The roads became dusty, as dry roads do when an army of
soldiers passes over them; and here was an army of soldiers along, with
its horse and foot and baggage-waggons--such an army as had never been
in the West since the days of Monmouth's Rebellion; and this great march
was the beginning of another rebellion, not destined to fail as the
other had failed. Without banners, without arms, with no noise, with no
shoutings of the captains, this great force marched to fight--to take
part in an encounter that proved more lasting in its effects than
any recorded in the history of England since the days of the Norman
Invasion.

The Cornish crowds did not know that they were making history. The
people had heard rumours of the preacher who had awakened the people of
Somersetshire from their sleep of years, and who, on being excluded
from the churches which had become Sabbath dormitories, had gone to the
fields where all was wakefulness, and had here spoken to the hearts of
tens of thousands.

The reports that spread abroad by the employment of no apparent agency
must have contained some element that appealed with overwhelming power
to the people of the West. The impulse that drove quiet folk from their
homes and induced them to march many miles along dusty roads upon the
morning of the only day of the week that gave them respite from toil was
surely stronger than mere curiosity. They did not go into the wilderness
to see a reed shaken by the wind. There was a seriousness of purpose
and a sincerity about these people which must have been the result of a
strong feeling among them that the existing order of things was lacking
in some essentials--that the Church should become a stimulating force to
them who were ready to perish, and not remain the apathetic force that
it was when at its best, the atrophying influence that it was when at
its worst.

That the ground was ready for the sowing was the opinion of Wesley,
though few signs had been given to him to induce this conclusion, but
that he had not misinterpreted the story of the Valley of Dry Bones was
proved by the sight of the multitudes upon the roads--upon the moorland
sheep-tracks--upon the narrow lanes where the traffic was carried on by
pack-horses. There they streamed in their thousands. Farmers with their
wives and children seated on chairs in their heavy waggons, men astride
of everything that was equine--horses and mules and asses--some with
their wives or sisters on the pillion behind them, but still more riding
double with a friend.

On the wayside were some who were resting, having walked seven or eight
or ten miles, and had seen the sun rise over the hills on that scented
Spring morning. Some were having their breakfast among the primroses
under the hedges, some were smoking their pipes before setting forth to
complete their journey. Mothers, were nursing their infants beneath the
pink and white coral of the hawthorns.

“'Tis a fair,” said Hal Holmes to his friend, Dick Pritchard, who was
seated by his side in a small pony cart made by himself during the
winter.

“Salvation Fair,” hazarded the water-finder. “Salvation Fair I would
call it if only I was bold enough.”

The smith shook his head.

“That is how it will be styled by many, I doubt not,” he said. “And
being as it must be, a strange mixture of the two--a church-going and a
fairgoing--I have my fears that 'twill fall  'twixt the two. If the thing
was more of a failure 'twould be a huge success. You take me, Dick?”

“Only vague, Hal--only vague, man,” replied the water-finder, after a
long cogitating pause. “When you spake the words there came a flash upon
me like the glim from the lanthorn when 'tis opened sudden. I saw the
meaning clear enough like as 'twere a stretch of valley on an uneven
night of moonlight and cloud. Seemed as if there was a rift in your
discourse and the moon poured through. But then the clouds fled across
and I walk in the dark. Say 't again, Hal, and it may be that 'twill be
plain. I have oft thought that your speech lit up marvellous well.”

The blacksmith grinned.

“Maybe that is by reason of my work with the forge,” he said. “The
furnace is black enough until I give it a blast with the bellows and
then 'tis a very ruby stone struck wi' lightning.”

“Maybe--ay, very likely,” said the little man doubtfully.

The smith grinned again.

“You don't altogether see it with my eyes, friend,” he said. “How could
you, Dick, our trades being natural enemies the one to t'other? My best
friend is fire, yours is water. But what was on my mind this moment was
the likelihood that the light-hearted may be fain to treat this great
serious field gathering as though it were no more than a fair. Now,
I say still that if 'twas no more than a gathering together of two or
three parishes none would think of it in light of a fair, but being as
'tis--a marvel of moving men and women--why, then, there may be levity
and who knows what worse.”

“Ay, it looks as if the carcase of the hills was alive and moving with
crawling maggots,” remarked Dick. The summit of the hill on the road
had been reached, and thus a view was given him and his companion of
the hollow in the valley beyond, which was black with the slow-moving
procession.

And there were many who, while anxious for the success of the meeting,
shared Hal Holmes's fears and doubts as to its result. What impression
could one man make upon so vast an assembly in the open air, they asked
of each other. They shook their heads.

These were the sober-minded people who sympathised with the aims of
the preacher--God-fearing men and women to whom his hopes had been
communicated. They knew that hundreds in that procession on the march to
the meeting-place were no more serious than they would be had they been
going to a fair. They were going to meet their friends, and they were
impelled by no higher motives than those which were the result of the
instinct of the gregarious animals. Many of them lived far away from a
town or even a village, in the wilder parts of the Duchy, and they laid
hold on an opportunity that promised to bring them in contact with a
greater crowd than they had ever joined before. The joy of being one of
the crowd was enough for them; the preaching was only an insignificant
incident in the day's proceedings. The sober-minded, knowing this,
were afraid that in these people the spirit of levity might be aroused,
especially if they could not hear the words of the preacher, and the
consequences would be disastrous.

And doubtless there were hundreds of the dwellers along the coast who
would have been pleased if grief came to an enterprise that threatened
their employment as smugglers or the agents of smugglers. Smuggling and
wrecking were along the coast, and pretty far inland as well, regarded
as a legitimate calling. Almost everyone participated in the profits of
the contraband, and the majority of the clergy would have been very
much less convivial if they had had to pay the full price for their
potations. Preaching against such traffic would have been impolitic
as well as hypocritical, and the clergy were neither. The parson who
denounced his congregation for forsaking the service on the news of a
wreck reaching the church was, probably, a fair type of his order.
His plea was for fair play. “Let us all start fair for the shore, my
brethren.”

Such men had a feeling that the man who had come to preach to the
multitude would be pretty sure to denounce their fraud; or if he did
not actually denounce it he might have such an influence upon their
customers as would certainly be prejudicial to the trade. This being
so, how could it be expected that they should not look forward to the
failure of the mission?

And there was but a solitary man to contend against this mixed
multitude! There was but one voice to cry in that wilderness--one voice
to awaken those who slept. The voice spoke, and its sound echoed round
the wide world.

He stood with bared head, with a rock for his pulpit, on a small plateau
overlooking a long stretch of valley. On each side there was an uneven,
sloping ground--rocks overgrown with lichen, and high tufts of coarse
herbage between, with countless blue wild flowers and hardy climbing
plants. The huge basin formed by the converging of the slopes made a
natural amphitheatre, where ten thousand people might be seated. Behind
were the cliffs, and all through the day the sound of the sea beating
around their bases mingled with the sound of many voices. A hundred feet
to the west there hung poised in its groove the enormous rocking stone
of Red Tor.

Perhaps amongst the most distant of his hearers there was one who might
never again have an opportunity of having the word that awakens spoken
in his hearing. There might be one whose heart was as the ground in
Summer--waiting for the seed to be sown that should bring forth fruit,
sixtyfold or an hundredfold. That was what the man thought as he looked
over the vast multitude. He felt for a moment overwhelmed by a sense
of his responsibility. He felt that by no will of his own he had been
thrust forward to perform a miracle, and he understood clearly that the
responsibility of its performance rested with him.

For a moment the cry of the overwhelmed was in his heart.

“It is too much that is laid upon me.”

For a moment he experienced that sense of rebellion which in a supreme
moment of their lives--the moment preceding a great achievement for
the benefit of the world--takes possession of so many of the world's
greatest, and which has its origin in a feeling of humility. It lasted
but for a moment. Then he found that every thought of his mind--every
sense of his soul--was absorbed by another and greater force. He had
a consciousness of being possessed by a Power that dominated every
sensation of his existence. That Power had thrust him out from himself
as it were, and he felt that he was standing by wondering while a voice
that he did not know to be his own went forth, and he knew that it
reached the most remote of the people before him. It was like his own
voice heard in a dream. For days there had been before his eyes the
vision that had come to the prophet--the vision of the Valley of Dry
Bones. He had seemed to stand by the side of the man to whom it had been
revealed. He had always felt that the scene was one of the most striking
that had ever been depicted; but during the week it was not merely its
mysticism that had possessed him. He felt that it was a real occurrence
taking place before his very eyes.

And now he was standing on his rock looking all through that long
valley, and he saw--not the thousands of people who looked up to him,
but ranks upon ranks and range upon range of dead men's bones, bleaching
in the sunshine--filling up all the hollows of the valley forsaken of
life, overhung by that dread legend of a battle fought so long ago
that its details had vanished. There they stretched, hillocks of white
bones--ridges of white bones--heaps upon heaps. The winds of a thousand
years had wailed and shrieked and whistled, sweeping through the valley,
the rains of a thousand years had been down upon them--hail and snow
had flung their pall of white over the whiteness of the things that lay
there, the lightnings had made lurid the hollow places in the rocks, and
had rent in sunder the overhanging cliffs--there was the sign of such
a storm--the tumbled tons of black basalt that lay athwart one of the
white hillocks--and on nights of fierce tempest the white foam from the
distant sea had been borne through the air and flung in quivering
flakes over cliffs and into chasm--upon coarse herbage and the blue rock
flowers. But some nights were still. The valley was canopied with stars.
And there were nights of vast moonlight, and the white moonlight spread
itself like a great translucent lake over the white deadness of that
dreary place....

The man saw scene after scene in that valley as in a dream. And then
there came a long silence, and out of that silence he heard the voice
that said: “Can these dead bones live?”

There was another silence before the awful voice spoke the command:

“Let these bones live!”

Through the moments of silence that followed, the sound of the sea was
borne by a fitful breeze over the cliff face and swept purring through
the valley.

Then came the moment of marvel. There was a quivering here and
there--something like the long indrawing of breath of a sleeper who has
slept for long but now awakens--a slow heaving as of a giant refreshed,
and then in mysterious, dread silence, with no rattling of hollow
skeleton limbs, there came the great moving among the dry bones, and
they rose up, an exceeding great army.

Life had come triumphant out of the midst of

Death. That was what the voice said. The whole valley, which had been
silent an hour before, was now vibrating, pulsating with life--the
tumult of life which flows through a great army--every man alert, at his
post in his rank--waiting for whatever might come--the advance of the
enemy, the carrying out of the strategy of the commander.

Life had come triumphant out of the midst of death, and who would dare
now to say that the deepest spiritual life might not lie hidden from
sight among the bleaching heaps of dead bones that strewed the valley
from cliffy to cliffs--hidden but only waiting for the voice to cry
aloud:

“Let these bones live!”

“Oh, that that Dread Voice would speak through me!” cried the preacher.

That was the first time he became conscious of the sound of his own
voice, and he was startled. He had heard that other voice speaking,
carrying him away upon the wings of its words down through the depths
of that mystic valley, but now all was silent and he was standing with
trembling hands and quivering lips, gazing out over no valley of mystery
alive with a moving host, but over a Cornish vale of crags; and yet
there beneath his eyes were thousands of faces, and they looked like
the faces of such as had been newly awakened after a long
sleep--dazed--wondering--waiting....

He saw it. The great awakening had come to these people, and now they
were waiting--for what?

He knew what he had to offer them. He knew what was the message with
which he had been entrusted--the good news which they had never heard
before.

And he told it with all simplicity, in all humility, in all
sincerity--the evangel of boundless love--of illimitable salvation, not
from the wrath to come--he had no need to speak of the Day of Wrath--his
theme wras the Day of Grace--salvation from the distrust of God's
mercy--salvation from the doubts, from the cares of the world, from the
lethargy that fetters the souls of men, from the gross darkness and from
the complacency of walking in that darkness.

He let light in upon their darkness and he forced them to see the
dangers of the dark, and, seeing, they were overwhelmed. For the first
time these people had brought before their eyes the reality of sin--the
reality of salvation. They had had doctrines brought before them in the
past, but the tale of doctrines had left them unmoved. They had never
felt that doctrines were otherwise than cold, impassioned utterances.
Doctrines might have been the graceful fabrics that clothed living
truths, but the truth had been so wrapped up in them that it had
remained hidden so far as they were concerned. They had never caught a
glimpse of the living reality beneath.

But here was the light that showed them the living thing for which they
had waited, and the wonder of the sight overwhelmed them.

The voice of the preacher spoke to them individually. That was the sole
mystery of the preaching--the sole magnetism (as it has been called) of
the preacher.

And that was the sole mystery of the manifestation that followed. Faces
were streaming with tears, knees were bowed in prayer; but there were
other temperaments that were forced to give expression to their varied
feelings--of wonder, of humiliation, of exultation. These were not to be
controlled. There were wild sobbings, passionate cries, a shout or
two of thanksgiving, an outburst of penitence--all the result of the
feelings too strong to be controlled, and all tokens of the new life
that had begun to pulsate in that multitude--all tokens that the Valley
which had been strewn with dry bones had heard the voice that said:

“Let these dry bones live.”

There was a great moving among the dry bones, and they stood up, an
exceeding great army.




CHAPTER VIII

His preaching had ceased, but the note that he had struck continued to
vibrate through the valley. He had spoken with none of the formality of
the priest who aims at keeping up a certain aloofness from the people.
This Mr. Wesley had spoken as brother to brother, and every phrase that
he uttered meant the breaking down of another of the barriers which
centuries had built up between the pulpit and the people.

They proved that they felt this to be so when he came among them.
Warm hands were stretched out to meet his own--words of blessing were
ejaculated by such as were able to speak; but infinitely more eloquent
were the mute expressions of the feeling of the multitude. Some there
were who could not be restrained from throwing themselves upon his
shoulders, clasping him as if he had indeed been their brother from whom
they had been separated for long; others caught his hands and kissed
them. Tears were still on many faces, and many were lighted up with an
expression of rapture that transfigured their features.

He made no attempt to restrain any of the extravagances to which that
hour had given birth. He knew better than to do so. He had read of the
extravagant welcome given by the people of a town long besieged to
the envoys who brought the first news of the approach of the relieving
force, and he knew that he was there as an envoy to tell the people
about him of their release. He had himself witnessed the reception given
to the King's Posts that brought the tidings of the last peace, and he
knew that he himself was a King's Messenger, bearing to these people the
tidings of Peace and Goodwill.

He had a word of kindness and comfort and advice to all. He was an elder
brother, talking to the members of his own family on equal terms. But
soon he left the side of these new-found brethren, for his eyes had not
failed to see some who were sitting apart among the low crags--some in
silent dejection, bearing the expression of prisoners for whom no order
of release has come, though they had seen it come for others. But all
were not silent: many were moaning aloud with ejaculations of despair.
In the joy that had been brought to their friends they had no share.
Nay, the message that had brought peace to others had brought despair
to them. They had been happy enough before, knowing nothing of or caring
nothing for, the dangers that surrounded them in the darkness, and the
letting in of the light upon them had appalled them.

He was beside them in a moment, questioning them, soothing their fears,
removing their doubts, whispering a word or two of prayer in their ears.
Jake, the carrier, had been right: the preacher had balm for the wounds
of those who suffered. He went about among them for hours, not leaving
the side of any who doubted until their doubts had been removed and they
shared the happiness that the Great Message brought with it. But the
evangel had arisen upon that valley as the Daystar, with healing in its
wings.

When the multitude dispersed, the church bells were making melody over
the hills and through the dales. The Reverend Mr. Wesley was a good
churchman, and he took care that his preaching did not interfere with
the usual services. His object was to fill the churches with devout men,
and not merely the body of the churches, but the pulpits as well.

For himself, he withdrew from his friends and walked slowly up one of
the tracks leading to the summit of the cliffs a few miles beyond the
village of Porthawn. He wished to be alone, for amid all his feelings
of thankfulness for the good which he knew had been done through his
preaching, there came to him a doubt. Had he been faithful in his
delivery of the Message? Had he yielded up everything of self to the
service of the Master? Had he said a word that might possibly become
a stone of stumbling to the feet that had just set out upon the narrow
way?

That was the fear which was ever present with him--the possibility
that the Message had failed in its power by reason of his frailty in
delivering it--the possibility that he might attribute to himself some
of the merit of the Message.

The hours which he passed in loneliness almost every day of his life,
the solitary rides covering thousands of miles, his long walks without
a companion, were devoted to self renunciation. He was more afraid of
himself than of any enemy from without. He sometimes found himself in
such a frame of mind as caused him to admire the spirit that led the
priests of the heathen beliefs in the East to torture and mutilate
themselves in the attainment of what appeared to them to be holiness.
He knew that their way was not the right way, and the object which
they strove to achieve was not a worthy one; but he could not deny the
self-sacrifice and its value.

Yes, but was it not possible that self-sacrifice might, if performed
ostentatiously, become only another form of self-glorification?

It was only now that this thought flashed upon him. He had walked along
the cliff path for a mile or two, and soon became aware of the pangs of
hunger. It was nothing for him to set out to preach without having more
than a bite or two of bread, and to go fasting until the afternoon. He
had never regarded this as an act of self-sacrifice. But how had he felt
when some of his friends had made much of these facts, entreating him
to be more mindful of his health? Had he not felt a certain pride in
thinking that his health was regarded as important?

And now, when he should return to the house where he was a guest--it
was the house of a Mr. Hartwell, the owner of a mine in the tin district
some distance from Porthawn--would not his hours of fasting preceding
and following the exertion of preaching to so great a multitude in the
open air make him appear akin to a martyr in the eyes of the people with
whom he might come in contact?

Nay, could he deny that he felt some vanity in the reflection that
here again he would be seriously remonstrated with for his disregard of
himself?

Even his orderly mind was unable to differentiate between the degrees of
self-sacrifice and self-satisfaction involved in this simple question of
fasting and eating, and he was troubled that his attempts to do so
were not wholly successful. It was like the man that, in his hours of
exhaustion, he should be dissatisfied with what was really the result
of his exhaustion. This trivial self-examination was, though he did not
know it, only the result of his neglect of the wants of his body. Yes,
but this fact did not make it the less worrying to him.

He had been led by the charm of the day to walk farther than he had
intended, and he was so exhausted that he found it necessary to rest in
a dip of the cliffs above the little bay. On each side of him stretched
the broken shore, a short crescent patch of sand at every dip in that
long, uneven wall, and marking the outline of its curve was the white
floss of the lazy ripples. Behind him was the coarse sand-herbage of the
broken shore, and in front of him stretched the sea. A white bird or two
hovered between the waters and the cliff summit, and far away a revenue
cutter showed its white sails. Sunlight was over all. The warm air
seemed imbued with the presence of God, which all might breathe and
become at peace with all the world.

It came over the face of the waters, upon the face of the man who
reclined upon a cushion of springy herbage that quite hid the shape of
the rock at whose base it found root. The feathery touch upon his
brow soothed him as a mother's hand soothes her child and banishes its
distrust. He lay there and every doubt that had oppressed him vanished.
He was weary and hungry, but he felt that the grace of heaven was giving
him food in the strength of which he might wander in the wilderness for
forty days.

He closed his eyes and with the faint hum of the little bees that droned
among the blue cliff-flowers,--with the faint wash of the ripples upon
the unnumbered pebbles of the beach--a sweet sleep crept over him.

When he awoke it was not with a start, but as gently as he had fallen
asleep. For a moment he had a fear that he had overslept himself. He
turned to look at the sun and saw standing only half a dozen yards
away the girl by whose side he had walked a few mornings before to the
village.

The picture that she made to his eyes was in keeping with the soothing
sights and sounds of this placid day. She wore a white kirtle and cap,
but the latter had failed to restrain the abundant hair which showed
itself in little curls upon her forehead, and in long strands of
sunshine over her ears and behind them. She was pleasant to look at--as
pleasant as was everything else of nature on this day; and he looked at
her with pleased eyes for some time before speaking.

As for Nelly, she was not watching him; but he could see that she had
seen him; she had only turned away lest he should have a man's distaste
to be caught sleeping in the daytime. He perceived this the moment
that he spoke and she turned to him. The little start that she gave was
artificial. It made him smile.

“I am at your mercy; but you will not betray my weakness to anyone,” he
said, smiling at her.

“Oh, sir!” she cried, raising her hands.

“You saw me sleeping. I hope that 'twas not for long,” he said.

“I did not come hither more than five minutes agone, sir,” she replied.
“You cannot have slept more than half an hour. I came to seek you after
the preaching.”

“You have not been at your church, girl?” he said.

“I was at your church, Mr. Wesley. I like Parson Rodney. I did not go to
his church.”

He shook his head.

“I like not such an answer, child.'Twould grieve me to learn that there
were many of my hearers who would frame the same excuse.”

She hung her head.

“I am sorry, sir,” she said. “It was my intent to go to Parson Rodney's
church, if only to see how vast a difference there was 'twixt--that is--I
mean, Mr. Wesley, that--that my intention was to be in church, only when
I saw that you had wended your way alone through the valley, not going
in the direction of Mr. Hartwell's house, but far away from it--what
could one do, sir, who knew that you could not have had a bite to eat
since early morning--and after such a preaching and an after-meeting
that filled up another fasting hour? 'He has no one to look after him,'
said my mother in my ear. 'He is a forlorn man who thinks that he is
doing God's service by forgetting that his body must be nourished if his
soul is to remain sound.'”

“That is what your mother said--'tis shrewd enough. And what did you
reply? Mind that the answer hath a bearing upon your staying away from
church, Nelly.”

“I said naught, Mr. Wesley; but what I did was to hurry to our home and
pack you a basket of humble victuals and--here it is.”

She picked up a reed basket from the grass and brought it beside him.
Kneeling then on a stone she raised the lid and showed him a dish of
cooked pilchards, some cakes of wheat bread and a piece of cream cheese
laid on a pale green lettuce.

She had spread the coarsest and whitest napkin he had ever seen on the
face of the crag at his elbow, and with the air of a bustling housewife
laid a plate and knife and fork for him, talking all the time--reproving
him quite gravely and even severely for his inattention to his
stomach--there was no picking and choosing of words in Cornwall
or elsewhere during that robust century. She gave him no chance of
defending himself, but rattled on upbraiding him as if he had been a
negligent schoolboy, until she had laid out his picnic for him, and had
spread the butter on one of the home-made cakes, saying:

“There, now, you must not get upon your feet until you have put down all
that is before you. If you was to make the attempt to do so your long
fast would make you so faint that you would run a chance of tottering
over the cliff.”

He saw that there was no need for him to say a word. What could he say
in the face of such attention to his needs as the girl was showing?

“I submit with a good grace, my dear,” he said when her work was done
and she paused for breath. “Why should not I submit? I am, as you said,
weak by reason of hunger, and lo, a table is spread for me with such
delicacies as would tickle the appetite of a man who has just partaken
of a heavy meal, and I am not that man. Happier than the prophet, I am
fed not by ravens, but by a white dove.”

“Oh, sir,” she said, her face shining with pleasure. “Oh, sir, I protest
that even in the genteelest society at the Bath, I never had so pretty a
compliment paid to me.”

He had paid his compliment to her in a delicate spirit of bantering, so
as to make no appeal to her vanity, and he saw that her pleasure was not
the result of gratified vanity.

“But concerning yourself, my dear,” he cried when he had his fork in
his hand, but had as yet touched nothing. “If I was fasting you must be
also.”

“What, sir, did I omit to say that I returned to my home after
your preaching?” she said. “Oh, yes; I got the basket there and the
pilchards. My father despises pilchards, but I hope that you----”

“I ama practical man, Nelly, and I know, without the need to make a
calculation on paper, that you could not be more than a few minutes in
your cottage, and that all that time was spent by you over my basket.
I know such as you--a hasty mouthful of cake and a spoonful of milk
and you say, 'I have dined.' Now I doubt much if you had so much as a
spoonful of milk, and therefore I say that unless you face me at this
table of stone, I will eat nothing of your store; and I know that that
would be the greatest punishment I could inflict upon you. Take your
place, madam, at the head of the table.”

She protested.

“Nay, sir, I brought not enough for two--barely enough to sustain one
that is a small feeder until he has the opportunity of sitting down to a
regular meal.”

“I have spoken,” he said. “I need but a bite! Oh, the long fasting
journeys that I have had within the year!”

She still hesitated, but when, at last, she seated herself, she did not
cause him to think that he had made her feel ill at ease; she adapted
herself to the position into which he had forced her, from the moment
she sat opposite to him. She forgot for the time that he was the
preacher on whom thousands of men and women had hung a couple of hours
before, and that she, if she had not been with him, would have been
eating in a fisherman's cottage.

She had acquired, through her association with the Squire's young
ladies, something of their manners. Her gift of quick observation was
allied to a capacity to copy what she observed, and being, womanlike,
well aware of this fact, she had no reason to feel otherwise than at
ease while she ate her share of the pilchards, and made him feel all the
time that she was partaking of his hospitality.

As for the preacher, he felt the girl's thoughtfulness very deeply. It
seemed that she was the only one of the thousands who had stood before
him that had thought for his needs. Her tact and the graceful way in
which she displayed it, even down to her readiness to sit with him lest
he should feel that she was remaining hungry, pleased him; and her
chat, abounding with shrewdness, was gracefully frank. He felt refreshed
beyond measure by her freshness, and he rose to walk to the house
where he was a guest, feeling that it was, indeed, good for him to have
changed the loneliness of his stroll for the companionship which she
offered him.




CHAPTER IX

The question had often been discussed by him to the furthest point
possible (as he thought) for its consideration to be extended; and how
was it that he found himself debating it at this time in its crudest
form? He had long ago settled it to his own satisfaction, that his life
was to be a lonely one through the world. Not for him were to be the
pleasant cares of home or wife or child. Not for him was the tenderness
of woman--not for him the babble of the little lips, every quiver of
which is a caress. His work was sufficient for him, he had often said,
and the contemplation of the possibility of anything on earth coming
between him and his labours, filled him with alarm. He felt that if he
were to cease to be absorbed in his work, he should be unfaithful to his
trust. The only one that was truly faithful was the one who was ready to
give up all to follow in the footsteps of the Master.

But being human and full of human sympathy, he had often felt a moment's
envy entering the house of one of his friends who was married and become
the father of children. The hundred little occurrences incidental to a
household, where there was a nursery and a schoolroom, were marked by
him--the clambering of little chubby legs up to the father's knee--the
interpretation of the latest phrase that fell from baby lips--the charm
of golden silk curls around an innocent child's face--all these and a
score of other delights associated with the household had appealed to
him, giving him an hour's longing at the time, and a tender recollection
at intervals in after years.

“Not for me--not for me,” he had said. So jealous was he of his work
that, as has been noted, the possibility of his becoming absorbed--even
partially--by anything that was not directly pertaining to his work,
was a dread to him. He set himself the task of crushing down within him
every aspiration that might tend to interfere with the carrying out
of the labour of his life, and he believed that, by stern and strict
endeavour, he had succeeded in doing so.

Then why should he now find himself considering the question which he
believed he had settled forever? Why should he now begin to see that the
assurance that it was not good for a man to be alone was based upon a
knowledge of men and was wise?

He found an apt illustration of the wisdom of the precept in the conduct
of the girl who had shown such thoughtfulness in regard to him. “Mentem
mortalia tangunt,” was the _sors Virgiliana_ which came to his mind at
the moment. He recognised the truth of it. A man was affected by the
material conditions of his life. If the girl had not shown such thought
for his comfort, he would well-nigh have been broken down by his
exhausting labours of the day, followed up by an exhausting walk along
the cliffs. He might not have returned to the house at which he was
staying in time to dine, before setting out for a long drive to another
place for an afternoon's meeting. So absorbed was he apt to be in his
preaching that he became oblivious to every consideration of daily life.
What were to him such trivial matters as eating and drinking at regular
intervals? He neglected the needs of his body, and only when he had
suffered for so doing did he feel that his carelessness was culpable. On
recovering from its' immediate effects, however, he fell back into his
old habits.

But now the thought that came to him was that he had need for someone to
be by his side as (for example) Nelly Polwhele had been. He knew quite
well, without having had the experience of married life, that if he had
had a wife, he would not have been allowed to do anything so unwise as
to walk straight away from the preaching to the cliffs, having eaten
nothing since the early morning, and then only a single cake of bread.
A good wife would have drawn him away from the people to whom he was
talking, to the house where he was a guest, and when there have set
about providing for him the food which he lacked and the rest which he
needed to restore him after his arduous morning's work, so that he might
set out for the afternoon's preaching feeling as fresh as he had felt in
the morning.

He was grateful to the girl, not only for her attention to him, but
also for affording him an illustration favourable to his altered way of
looking at a question which he fancied had long ago been settled forever
in his mind. (He had long ago forgiven the woman, who, in America, had
taught him to believe that a life of loneliness is more conducive to
one's peace of mind than a life linked to an unsympathetic companion.)

And having been led to such a conclusion, it was only reasonable that he
should make a resolution that, if he should ever be so fortunate as to
meet with a virtuous lady whom he should find to possess those qualities
which promised most readily to advance the work which he had at heart,
he would not be slow to ask her to be his companion to such an end.

This point settled to his satisfaction (as he thought), he mounted his
horse, after a week's stay in the valley of the Lana, and made his way
to the tinners of Camlin, twenty miles further along the coast Here
he was received with open arms, and preached from his rock pulpit to
thousands of eager men and women an hour after sunrise on a summer
morning.

On still for another fortnight, in wilder districts, among people who
rarely entered a church, and whom the church made no attempt to reach.
These were the people for him. He was told that he was going forth to
sow the seed in stony ground, but when he came and began to sow, he
found that it fell upon fruitful soil. Here it was impossible for him
to find a huge congregation, so scattered were the inhabitants. But this
was no obstacle to him: he asked for no more than a group of hearers
in every place, and by the time that night came he found that he had
preached to thousands since sunrise. Beginning sometimes at five o'clock
in the morning, he would preach on the outskirts of a village and hold
a second service before breakfasting six miles away. It was nothing for
him to preach half a dozen times and ride thirty miles in one of these
days.

But as he went further and further on this wonderful itinerary of his,
that sense of loneliness of which he had become aware at Porthawn seemed
to grow upon him. During those intervals of silence which he spent on
horseback, his feeling of loneliness appeared to increase, until at last
there came upon him a dread lest he should affect his labours. He had a
fear that a despondent note might find its way into his preaching, and
when under such an influence he made a strong effort in the opposite
direction, he was conscious of an artificial note; and, moreover, by the
true instinct of the man who talks to men, he was conscious that it was
detected by his hearers.

He was disappointed in himself--humiliated. How was it that for years
he had been able to throw off this feeling of walking alone, through
the world, or making no effort to throw it off, to glory in it, as it
were--to feel all the stronger because of it, inasmuch as it could not
come without bringing with it the reflection that he--he alone--had been
chosen to deliver the message to the multitudes--the message of Light to
the people that walked in darkness?

He could not understand how the change had come about in him, and not
being able to understand it, he felt the more humiliated.

And then, one day, riding slowly along the coach road, he saw a young
woman standing waiting for a change of horses for her post chaise at the
door of a small inn.

He started, for she had fair hair and a fresh face whose features bore
some resemblance to those of Nelly Polwhele--he started, for there came
upon him, with the force of a revelation, the knowledge that this was
the companionship for which he was longing--that unconsciously, she had
been in his thoughts--some way at the back of his thoughts, to be sure,
but still there--that, only since he had been her companion had his need
for some sweet and helpful companionship become impressed upon him..

He rode on to his destination overwhelmed by the surprise at the result
of this glimpse which had been given to him into the depths of his
own heart. The effect seemed to him as if with the sight of that
stranger--that young woman on the roadside--a flash of lightning had
come, showing him in an instant what was in the depths of his heart.

He tried to bring himself to believe that he was mistaken.

“Impossible--impossible!” he cried. “It is impossible that I should be
so affected--a village girl!... And I did not talk with her half a dozen
times in all!... Kind, thoughtful, with tact--a gracious presence, a
receptive mind.... Ah, it was she undoubtedly who set me thinking--who
made me feel dissatisfied with my isolation, but still.. . oh,
impossible--impossible!”

And, although a just man, the thoughts that he now believed himself to
have in regard to Nelly Polwhele were bitter rather than sweet. He
began to think that it was too bold of her--almost immodest--to make the
attempt to change the whole course of the life of such a man as he was.
He had once courted the lonely life, believing it to be the only
life for such as he--the only life that enabled him to give all his
thoughts--all his strength--oh, all his life--all his life--to the work
which had been appointed for him to do in the world of sinners; but lo!
that child had come to him, and had made him feel that he was not so
different from other men.

Under the influence of his bitterness, he resented her intrusion, as
it were. Pshaw! the girl wras nothing. It was only companionship as
a sentiment that he had been longing for; he had a clear idea of the
companionship that he needed; but he had never thought of the companion.
It was a mere trick of the fancy to suggest that, because the young
woman had sent his thoughts into a certain groove, they must of
necessity be turned in the direction of the young woman herself.

He soon found, however, that it is one thing for a man to prove to the
satisfaction of his own intelligence that it would be impossible that he
should set his heart on a particular young woman, but quite another to
shut her out from his heart. He had his heart to reckon with, though he
did not know it.

Before the day had passed he had shut the doors of his heart, and he
believed that he had done right. He did not know that he had shut those
doors, not against her, but upon her.

Like all men who have accomplished great things in the world, he was
intensely human. His sympathy flowed forth for his fellow-men in all
circumstances of life. But he did not know himself sufficiently well to
understand that what he thought of with regret as his weaknesses, were
actually those elements wherein lay the secret of his influence with
men.

He had just succeeded, he fancied, in convincing himself that it was
impossible he could ever have entertained a thought of Nelly Polwhele as
the one who could afford him the companionship which he craved, when a
letter came to him from Mr. Hartwell, whom he had appointed the leader
of the class which he had established at Porthawn, entreating him to
return to them, as they were in great distress and in peril of falling
to pieces, owing to the conduct of one of their members, Richard
Pritchard by name.

Could he affirm that the sorrow which he felt on receiving this news was
the sum of all the emotions that filled his heart at that moment?

He laid down the letter, saying,

“It is the Lord's doing.”

And when he said that, he was thinking, not of the distress in which his
children at Porthawn found themselves by reason of Richard Pritchard,
but of the meaning of the summons to himself.

“It is the trial to which my steadfastness is to be put,” he said. “I am
not to be allowed to escape without scathe. Why should I expect to do so
when others are tried daily? There can be no victory without a battle.
The strength of a man is developed by his trial. I am ready. Grant me
grace, O Lord, to sustain me, and to keep my feet from straying!”

He prepared himself for this journey back to Porthawn, and he was
presently amazed (having been made aware of his own weakness) to find
himself thinking very much less about himself and scarcely at all about
Nelly Polwhele, nor that the chance of seeing her again had, without the
least expectation on his part, came to him. He found himself giving
all his thoughts to the question of his duty. Had he been over-hasty in
accepting the assurances of all these people at Porthawn to whose souls
peace had come through his preaching? Was he actuated solely by a hope
to spread abroad the Truth as he had found it, or had a grain of the
tares of Self been sown among the good seed? Had there been something of
vanity in his desire to increase the visible results of his preaching?

These were his daily questionings and soulsearching, and they had been
ever present with him since he had put his hand to the plough. He was
ever apt to accuse himself of vainglory--of a lack of that spirit of
humility which he felt should enter into every act--every thought of his
life. He thought of himself as the instrument through which his Master
spake to His children. Should the harp vaunt itself when a hand sweeps
over its strings, making such music as forces those who hear to be
joyful or sad? Should the trumpet take credit to itself because through
its tubes is blown the blast that sends an army headlong to the charge?

After his first preaching in the valley of the Lana, hundreds of those
who heard him had come to him making a profession of the Faith that he
preached. He asked himself now if it was not possible that he had been
too eager to accept their assurance. He had had his experiences of the
resultat the emotions of his listeners being so stirred by his preaching
that they had come to him with the same glad story; but only to become
lukewarm after a space, and after another space to lapse into their
former carelessness. The parable of the Sower was ever in his mind. The
quick upspring-ing of the seed was a sign that it had fallen where there
was no depth of earth. And this sowing was more hopeless than that on
stony ground--than that among thorns.

He feared that he had been too hasty. He was a careless husbandman
who had been too ready to assume that a plentiful harvest was at hand,
because he had sown where there was no depth of earth. He should have
waited and watched and noted every sign of spiritual growth before
leaving the field of his labours.

These were some of his self-reproaches which occupied all his thoughts
while making his return journey to Porthawn, thus causing all thought of
Nelly Polwhele to be excluded from his mind. He had caught a glimpse of
the Lana winding its way through the valley before he had a thought of
her, and then it was with some bitterness that he reflected that, all
unknown to himself, he had shortened his stay in this region because
he had had an instinct that a danger would threaten him if he were
to remain. Instinct? Now he was dealing with a force that was wholly
animal--wholly of the flesh, and the flesh, he knew, was waging
perpetual war with the things that appertained to the spirit.

He urged his horse onward. Whatever danger might threaten himself by his
returning to this region, he would not shrink from it; what was such a
danger compared with that threatening the edifice of Faith which he had
hoped had been built up in the midst of the simple people of the land?

He urged his horse forward, and on the afternoon of the second day of
his journey he was within a few hours' journey of Ruthallion Mill.
He meant to call at the Mill, feeling sure that he would get from the
miller a faithful and intelligent account of all that had happened
during the three weeks of his absence from this neighbourhood. Miller
Pendelly, once the champion of the old system of lifeless churchgoing,
had become the zealous exponent of the new. He was the leader of
the little band that formed the nucleus of the great organisation of
churchmen who, under the teaching of Wesley, sought to make the Church
the power for good among the people that it was meant to be. Jake
Pullsford, who had spread the story of Wesley's aims among his friends
before the preacher had appeared in Cornwall, had given evidence of the
new Light that had dawned upon him when he had heard Wesley at Bristol.
Both these were steadfast men, not likely to cause offence, and if
Wesley had heard any report of their falling short of what was expected
of them he would have been more than disappointed.

It was through Richard Pritchard, the professional water-finder, that
offence had come or was likely to come, Mr. Hartwell's letter had told
him. He remembered the man very clearly. He had had some conversation
with him, and Jake had satisfied him as to the sincerity of his belief.
He had never been otherwise than a clean-living man, and he had studied
many theological works. But he had not impressed Mr. Wesley as being a
person of unusual intelligence. His remarkable calling and the success
with which he practised it all through the West had caused Him to appear
in the eyes of the people of the country as one possessing certain
powers which, though quite legitimate, being exercised for good, were
bordering on the supernatural. Wesley now remembered that he had had
some doubt as to the legitimacy of the man's calling. Believing, as he
did, so fully in the powers of witchcraft, he had a certain amount of
uneasiness in accepting as a member of the little community which he
was founding, a man who used the divining rod; but the simplicity of
Pritchard and his exemplary character, were in his favour, so much as to
outweigh the force of. Wesley's objection to his mode of life.

Now, as he guided his horse down the valley road, he regretted bitterly
that he had allowed his misgivings to be overcome so easily. Like all
men who have accomplished great things in the world, the difficulties
which occasionally beset him were due to his accepting the judgment
of others, putting aside his own feelings or tendencies, in certain
matters. The practice of the virtue of humility, in regard to his
estimation of the value of his own judgment, had cost him dearly upon
occasions.

It was all the more vexatious to reflect that the man through whom the
trouble (whatever it might be) was impending, was the last one in the
world from whom any trouble might reasonably be looked for. This was
probably the first time in his life that he had reached any prominence
in the little circle in which he lived. To be allowed to remain in the
background, seemed to be his sole aspiration. His fear of giving offence
to anyone seemed to be ever present with him, and his chief anxiety was
to anticipate an imaginary offence by an apology. How a man who was so
ludicrously invertebrate should become a menace to the stability of a
community that included such robust men as the miller, the carrier, and
the smith, to say nothing of Farmer Tregenna and Mr. Hartwell, the mine
owner, was more than Wesley could understand. It was this element of
mystery that caused him to fear that Pritchard had all along been an
agent of the Enemy--that his noted successes with the divining rod were
due to his connection with the Powers of Darkness, and that his getting
within the fold of the faithful was, after all, only what might have
been expected from one whose tactics were devised for him by the Old
Serpent--the origin of every evil since the expulsion from Paradise.




CHAPTER X

He spent an hour at the Old Waggoner Inn at the corner of the River
Road, and while his horse was getting a feed in the stable he had some
bread and cheese in the inn parlour--a large room built to accommodate
the hungry coach passengers, who, accustomed to break their journey to
or from Plymouth, were at this house.

The room was not crowded when he arrived, but in the course of the next
half-hour two additional parties entered, and while tankards were filled
and emptied, and pewter platters of underdone beef laden with pickles
were passed round, there was a good deal of loud talk, with laughter and
an interchange of friendly, if rude, humour. Wesley had had a sufficient
experience of inn parlours to prevent his being greatly interested by
the people here or their loud chat.

This was only at first, however, for it soon became clear to him that
the conversation and the jests were flowing in one channel. Then he
became interested.

“Come hither, friend Thomas, and pay all scores,” cried one jovial young
fellow to an elderly stout farmer who had been standing in the bar.

“Not me, lad,” cried the farmer. “By the Lord Harry, you've the
'impidence'!”.

“What, man, pay and look joyous. What will all your hoard of guineas be
to you after Monday?” cried the younger man.

“'Twill be worth twenty-one shillings for every guinea, if you must
know,” replied the farmer.

“Nay, sir, you know well that there will be no use for your guineas at
the Day of Judgment, which, as surely as Dick Pritchard is a prophet,
will happen on Monday,” said the other.

“I'm ready to run the chance, i' the face o' the Prophet Pritchard,”
 said the farmer. “Ay, and to show what's in me, I am ready 'twixt now
and Sunday to buy any property at a reasonable discount rate that any
believer in Dick Pritchard may wish to sell.”

“Good for you, farmer--good for you!” shouted a dozen voices, with the
applause of rattling pewters on the table.

“Let Dick stick to his trade--water and not fire is his quality; he'd
best leave the Day of Judgment in subtler hands,” growled a small,
red-faced man, who was cooling himself this Summer day with Jamaica rum.

There was some more laughter, but it was not of a hearty sort; there was
a forced gaiety in it that Wesley easily detected.

“By my troth, the fellow's prophecy hath done a good turn to the
maltster; there hath been more swilling, hot and cold, since he spoke a
week ago yesterday, than in any month of ordinary calm weather, without
a sniff of brimstone in it,” said Mr. Hone, the surgeon of the revenue
men, who was in the act of facing a huge beef-steak with onions and a
potato baked with a sauce of tansy.

“Small blame to the drouthy ones; they know full well that by this day
week they will be ready to pay Plymouth prices for a mugful o' something
cooling,” remarked a traveller.

“Gentlemen and friends, all, I make bold enough to affirm that this
matter is too grave an one to be jested on or to be scoffed at,” said a
tall, pale-faced young man. “I tell you, sirs, that there may be more in
this thing than some of us suspect.”

“What, Mr. Tilley, are you feeble enough to believe that an event of
such considerable importance to the Government as the Day of Judgment
would be announced through such an agent? This Dick Pritchard is a
common man, as full of ignorance as a young widow is of tricks,” said
the surgeon, looking up from his plate.

“Ignorant? ay, doubtless, Mr. Hone; but how many ignorant men have yet
won an honourable place in the book of the prophets, sir?” asked the
young man. “Seems to any natural man, sir, that ignorance, as we call
ignorance, was the main quality needful for an ancient old prophet that
spake as he was moved.”

“That was in the Antique Dispensation, Mr. Tilley; you must not forget
that, sir,” cried the surgeon.

“Ay, that's sure; 'tis a different age this that we live in,” said an
acquiescent voice behind the shelter of a settle.

“I'd as lief credit a Christian as a Jew in such a matter: the Jews seem
to have had this business of prophecy as exclusive in their hands as
they have the trade of money now,” said the traveller. “The Jewish seers
busied themselves a good deal about the Day of Judgment, why should
not a humble Christian be permitted a trifle of traffic on the
same question, since it is one that should be of vital interest to
all--especially innkeepers in hot weather?”

There was only a shred of laughter when he had spoken. It was clear that
in spite of some of the jeers against the water-finder that had taken
place in the room, there was a feeling that whatever he had taken it
upon him to say--it seemed to Wesley that it had reference to the Day
of Judgment on the next Monday--should not be treated with levity. The
jocular tone of a few men who were present was distinctly forced. Upon
several faces Wesley perceived an expression that reminded him of that
upon the faces of some of the prisoners under sentence of death whom he
had visited in his young days at Oxford.

“Say what you will, gentlemen,” resumed the young man called Tilley,
“this Dick Pritchard is no ordinary man. I have seen him at work with
his wizard's wand', and inside five minutes o' the clock he had shown
us where to bore for water in a meadow slope that was as deeply pitted
before with borings as if it had an attack of smallpox. Ay, sirs, a
hole had been dug here and another there--and there--and there--” he
indicated with his finger on the floor the locality of the diggings to
which he referred--“but not a spoonful of water appeared. Then in comes
our gentleman with a sliver of willow between his palms, and walks over
the ground. I was nigh to him, and I affirm that I saw the twig twist
itself like a snake between his fingers, jerking its tip, for all the
world like the stumpy head of an adder, first in one direction, anon
in another--I'll swear that it turned, wicked as any snake, upon Dick
himself at one time, so that he jerked his hands back and the thing fell
on the grass, and if it did not give a kind of writhe there, my eyes
played me false. But he picked it up again and walked slowly across the
ground, not shunning in the least as an ordinary man would have done, if
he had his wits about him, the parts that showed the former borings that
had come to naught. 'Twas in full boldness, just between two of the old
holes, that he stopped short, and says he, 'There's your spring, and
'tis not six foot from the surface. I'll wait to have a mugful, if I
don't make too bold,' says he, 'for'tis strangely drying work, this
waterfinding.' And by my faith, sirs, the fellow had a pitcher of the
softest spring water from that spot before an hour had gone and the rude
scum of the field had been rinsed away.”

The silence that followed the man's story was impressive. It seemed as
if the cloud which had been overhanging the company had become visible.
No man so much as glanced at his neighbour, but every one of them
stopped eating or drinking at that moment, and stared gloomily straight
in front of him. Only one man, however, uttered a groan.

“Lord have mercy on us!--the rocks and the mountains--the great and
terrible day of the Lord!” he murmured.

Then it was that a couple of men passed their hands over their
foreheads.

“I would sooner see my cattle die of drouth than call in a
water-finder,” said the farmer. “I've oft-times said that he has a
partner in his trade. In my young days, a water-finder was burnt at the
stake, for 'twas clearly proven that he was in league with the Fiend:
after drinking o' the water that he drew from the bowels o' th' earth
the husbandman's son was seized wi' a fit and down he fell like a log
and was only saved by the chance of the curate passing near the farm.
Though but a young man, he saw at once that the boy had been tampered
with.'Twas by good luck that he had with him a snuffbox made of the
cedar wood of Lebanon at Jerusalem, where King Solomon built his temple,
and 'tis well known that neither witch nor warlock can stand against
such. Before you could say 'Worm,' the young parson had made a circle
o' snuff around the poor victim, and with a deadly screech the fiend
forsook the boy and 'twas said that it entered into a young heifer of
promise, for she went tearing out of her byre that same night and was
found all over a lather wandering on Dip-stone Sands in the morning. Ay,
they burnt the water-finder at the next 'Sizes, the testimony being so
clear as I say.”

“'Tis time they burnt Dick Pritchard,” said someone else in a low voice.
“Though I'm not sure that 'tis in the Book that mere water-finding is
heinous.”

“Maybe not, but sure a proof o' the gift o' prophecy is burnable in the
New Dispensation,” suggested another.

A big man sprang to his feet. His face was pale and his hands were
nervous. He clapped his palms together.

“Every man in the room has a tankard with me,” he cried. “I'll pay the
score for all. What use is the blunt to me after Monday? But now is our
time, lads. Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die!”

The sentiment was greeted with a loud and harsh laugh by some men, but
by a serious shake of the head by others. A young man started a ribald
song.

“Shame, sir, shame, a parson's present in the room,” cried an elderly
man, who was seated near Wesley.

The lilt was interrupted, and two or three fingers were pointed toward
Wesley, who was half hidden from most of the people in the room. Now he
stood up and faced them all.

“Hey, 'tis Wesley the preacher himself!” cried the surgeon, and
expressions of surprise were uttered in various directions.

“You have come in good time to superintend the winding up of the world,
Mr. Wesley. Nay, don't be over modest; 'tis one of your own children
hath said it,” said another. “What, sir; would you disown your own
offspring?”

Wesley had held up his hand twice while the man was speaking.

“Friends, I am John Wesley,” he said. “I have come sixty miles and
better, having heard from Mr. Hartwell that I was needed in regard to
this same Pritchard, but having been made acquainted with no points of
detail. Sirs, since I entered this room I have, I believe, learned all
that Mr. Hartwell forbore to tell me, and now I hasten to give you my
assurance that I cannot countenance aught that this man Pritchard said.
I deplore most heartily that he should be so far misled as to take upon
him to utter a statement of prophecy touching the most awful event that
our faith as believers takes a count of. Brethren, we are told that we
know not the day nor the hour when that dread shall fall upon the world.
That is the written Word of the Most High, and any man who, whether
under the impulse of vanity or in the sincere belief that he possesses
the gift of prophecy, is presumptuous, is likely to become a stumbling
block and a rock of offence. That is all that I have to say at this
time. I have said so much in the hope that all who hear me will refrain
from attributing to the influence of my preaching or teaching, an act or
a statement which I and my associates repudiate and condemn.”

He inclined his head slowly, and then, picking up his hat, left the
room. But before he reached the door every man in the room had risen
respectfully, though no word was spoken by anyone present. Even after
his departure there was a silence that lasted for several minutes.
Everyone seemed to have drawn a long breath as of relief.

“Gentlemen, I think you may breathe freely once more: the world will
last over Monday after all,” said the surgeon.

“Ay, the master has spoken and disowned his pupil,” said another.

“Maybe that's because he feels chagrined that he lost the chance that
Dick Pritchard grappled with,” suggested the pale youth.

“Boy,” said the traveller, with a contemptuous wave of the hand. “Boy,
Mr. Wesley is a man of learning and a man of parts, not a charlatan in a
booth at a fair.”

“Or one with the duck's instinct of seeking for water with a quack--ay,
a quack with a quack,” said the surgeon.

“Well, if the world is not to expire on Monday, we would do well to drink
her health, so hey for a gallon of old ale so far as it goes,” cried the
man with the shaking head.

The opinion seemed to be all but general, that some sign of hilarity
would not now be so much out of place as it seemed to be a quarter of an
hour earlier, and the landlord was zealous in support of this view. He
promised them a tipple worthy of the name, even if the world were to
break up in a day or two!

But long before the company were satisfied Wesley was on his horse
riding slowly down to Ruthallion Mill.

He felt deeply pained by his experience in the inn parlour. So this was
what Mr. Hartwell had hinted at in his letter--this assumption of the
divine gift of the prophet by Pritchard. And the subject of his prophecy
was one that every charlatan who had existed had made his own! He
himself could remember more than one such prediction being made by men
who were both ignorant and vain. One of them had afterwards stood in
the pillory and another--the more sincere--had gone to a mad-house. It
seemed to him strange that they should have had a following, but
beyond a doubt their prediction had been widely credited, and the men
themselves had achieved a notoriety which was to them the equivalent to
fame. They had had their followers even after the date which they named
in their prophecies had gone by without any disaster to the world. It
seemed that the people were so glad at escaping that they had no room in
their thoughts for any reproach for the false prophet.

He knew, however, that in the case of Richard Pritchard, the same
leniency would not be shown. He knew that his own detractors--and
they were many who regarded his innovations as a direct menace to the
Church--would only be too glad of the chance which was now offered to
them of ridiculing him and his out-of-doors preaching, pointing out, as
they most certainly would, that Richard Pritchard represented the first
fruit of his preaching, and that his assumption of the authority of a
prophet was the first fruit of his Methodism.

But it was not only by reason of the possible injury that would be done
to the movement which he had inaugurated in Cornwall that he was vexed.

He had been greatly pained to observe the spirit in which the most awful
incident on which the mind of man could dwell was referred to by the
men in the inn parlour--men fairly representative of the people of the
neighbourhood. The Day of Wrath had been alluded to with levity by some,
in a spirit of ridicule by others; while one man had made it the subject
of a wager, and another had made it an excuse for drunkenness!

He was grieved and shocked to reflect that it was Pritchard's connection
with his mission that had produced this state of things. He felt certain
that if the man had remained outside the newly founded organisation, he
would not have taken it upon himself to speak as a prophet.

But he felt that he could not lay the blame for what had occurred at the
door of anyone whom he had appointed to help him in his work, and who
had advanced the claims of Pritchard, for who could have foreseen that
a man who seemed abnormally modest and retiring by nature should develop
such a spirit? Beyond a doubt the man's weak head had been turned. He
had become possessed of a craving after notoriety, and now that he had
achieved it, he would be a very difficult person to deal with. This
Wesley perceived when he began to consider how to deal with the source
of the affair.

The most difficult point in this connection was his feeling that the man
was quite sincere in his belief, that upon him the spirit of prophecy
had descended. He felt sure that the man was unaware of the existence of
any motive in his own heart apart from the desire to utter a warning and
a call to repentance to the people of the world, as Jonah the prophet,
had done to the people of Nineveh.

That fact, Wesley perceived, made it a matter of great difficulty both
to silence Pritchard, and to hold him up as a charlatan.

He was indeed greatly perplexed in mind as he rode down the valley path
leading to the Mill.




CHAPTER XI

Wesley could not, of course, know that Pritchard was at that time
in the Mill awaiting his arrival. But it was the case that the
water-finder, learning that the coming of Mr. Wesley was looked for
during the afternoon, had gone to the Mill early and had rejected the
suggestion made by the blacksmith and Jake Pullsford, that he should
not appear in the presence of Mr. Wesley until he was sent for. He was
almost indignant at the hint conveyed to him in an ambiguous way by Hal
Holmes, that it would show better taste if he were to remain away for
the time being.

“Take my word for 't, Dick, you'll be brought face to face with him soon
enow,” said Hal. “You'll be wishful that you had ne'er been born or
thought of. Mr. Wesley is meek, but he isn't weak, and 'tis the meek
ones that's the hardest to answer when the time comes, and it always
comes too soon. Before your Monday comes you'll be wishful to hide away
and calling on the mountains to cover ye.”

“List to me, Hal; there's naught that will say nay to me when my mind is
made up, and go to face Mr. Wesley I shall,” Dick had replied.

The blacksmith folded his big bare arms and looked at him with curiosity
from head to foot.

“A change has come o'er a good many of us since Mr. Wesley began to
preach, but what's all our changes alongside yours, Dick Pritchard?” he
said, shaking his head as though he relinquished this task of solving
the problem which had been suggested to him. “Why, you was used to fear
and tremble at the thin noise of your own voice, Dick Pritchard. With
these ears I have heard you make an apology for saying 'Thank ye,' on
the score that you were too bold. But now you are for rushing headlong
to meet the man that you scarce dare lift your hat to a month or two
agone.”

“I hadn't learned then all that there's in me now, Hal,” replied the
water-finder. “I always did despise myself, being unmindful that to
despise myself was to do despite to Heaven. Doesn't it stand to reason,
Hal, that the greater a man thinks himself, the greater is the honour he
does to his Maker? I think twice as much of God since I came to see what
a man He made in me.”

“That's a square apology for conceit, Dick, and I don't think aught the
better of you for putting it forward at this time and in such a case as
this. What, good fellow, would you be at the pains to magnify a man's
righteousness pace for pace with his conceit? At that rate, the greater
the coxcomb the more righteous the man.”

Dick was apparently lost in thought for some time. At last he shook his
head gravely, saying:

“Not for all cases, Hal, not for all cases. You be a narrow-souled
caviller, I doubt; you cannot comprehend an argyment that's like a
crystal diamond, with as many sides to it as a middling ignorant man
would fail to compute.”

“That may be, but I've handled many a lump of sea-coal that has shown
as many sides as any diamond that was ever dug out of the earth, and it
seems to me that your talk is more like the sea-coal than the crystal,
Dick, my friend,” said the blacksmith. “Ay, your many-sided argyments
are only fit to be thrust into the furnace, for all, their sides.”

“Mr. Wesley will comprehend,” said Pritchard doggedly; “though even Mr.
Wesley might learn something from me. Ay, and in after years you will
all be glad to remember that you once dwelt nigh a simple man by name
Richard Pritchard.”

“In after years?” cried Hal Holmes. “Why, where are your after years to
come from, if the end of all things is to be on us on Monday?”

“Don't you doubt but that 'twill come to an end on Monday,” said the
water-finder, “however you may twist and turn. Be sure that you be
prepared, Hal Holmes. You have been a vain-living blacksmith, I am
feared, and now you side with them that would persecute the prophets.
Prepare yourself, Hal, prepare yourself.”

This was the style in which the man had been talking for some time,
astonishing everyone who had known his extreme modesty in the past; and
this was the strain in which he talked when he had entered the Mill,
and found the miller, Jake Pulls-ford and Mr. Hartwell seated together
awaiting the arrival of Wesley.

The man's entrance at this time surprised them. They knew he was
aware that Mr. Wesley was returning in haste, owing solely to his,
Pritchard's, having put himself forward in a way that his brethren could
not sanction, and it never occurred to them that he would wish to
meet Mr. Wesley at this time. They were, as was Hal Holmes, under the
impression that when Wesley arrived Pritchard's former character might
show itself once more, causing him to avoid even the possibility of
meeting the preacher face to face.

They were soon undeceived. The water-finder was in no way nervous when
he came among them.

When he had in some measure recovered from his surprise, the miller said:
“We looked not for thy coming so soon, Dick, but maybe 'tis as well that
thou 'rt here.”

“How could I be away from here unless I had hastened to meet Mr. Wesley
on his way hither?” said Pritchard. “I have been trembling with desire
to have his ear for the past week. It is laid on me to exhort him
on some matters that he neglected. These matters can be neglected no
longer.”

The miller looked at Jake Pullsford, and the latter sat aghast. He was
so astounded that he could only stare at Pritchard, with his hands on
his knees and his head in its usual poise, craning forward. Some moments
had passed before he succeeded in gasping out, after one or two false
starts:

“You--you--you--Dick Pritchard--you talk of exhorting Mr. Wesley? Oh,
poor fellow! poor fellow! Now, indeed, we know that you are mad!”

“Mr. Wesley should ha' found out the gift that is mine,” said Pritchard,
quite ignoring the somewhat frank utterance of the carrier. “I suspected
myself during several months of having that great gift of prophecy.'Twas
no more than a suspicion for some time, and I dare not speak before I
was sure.”

“And what made thee sure, Dick?” asked the miller.

“'Twas reading how the great prophet, Moses, made water flow from the
rock,” replied Pritchard. “'What,' said I to my own self. 'What, Richard
Pritchard, hath not all thy life been spent in performing that great
miracle of Moses, and hast not known the greatness of thy gift?' And
then I made search and found that water-finding has been the employment
of most of the great prophets, Elijah being the foremost. Like to a
flash from a far-off cannon gun, that reaches the eyes before ever the
sound of the boom comes upon the ear, the truth was revealed to me. I
knew then that the gift of the Tishbite was mine.”

It was Jake Pullsford who now looked at the miller. The miller shook his
head.

“'Twould not matter much what you thought of yourself, Dick,” said the
miller, “if only you had not been admitted to our fellowship; but things
being as they be---”

He shook his head again.

“What overcomes me is the thought of thy former habit of life, Dick,”
 said the carrier. “Why, up to a month agone, a man more modest, shy and
tame speaking, wasn't to be found in all the West Country. Why, man,
I've seen thee sweat at the sound of thine own voice, like as if thou
hadst been a thief a-hearing o' the step of an officer! Meek! Meek is no
name for it! I give thee my word that it oft made me think shame of all
manhood in the world to hear thee make apology for a plain truth that,
after all, thou wast too bashful to utter!”

“You could not see my heart, Miller,” said Pritchard. “'Twas only that
I was humble in voice; I know now that in spirit I was puffed up with
pride, so that I could hardly contain myself. But even after the truth
came upon me in that flash, I was ready to treat the likes of you,
Miller--ay, even the likes of thee, Jake Pullsford, as mine equal, so
affable a heart had I by birth.”

“You promoted yourself a bit, Dick,” remarked the miller. “But I've
always observed that when a man tells another in that affable way that
he regards the other as his equal, he fancies in the inwardness of his
heart, that he is far above the one he gives such an assurance to.”

“I feel a sort of light of knowledge within me ready to break forth
and tell me a wonderful reply to that remark of yours, Miller,” said
Pritchard. “Tarry a while, and give me time for the light to-break forth
with fulness, and you'll be rewarded; friends, you will hear a reply
that will make you all stand back in amaze, and marvel, as I have done,
how noble a thing is the gift of speech--saying a phrase or two that
makes the flesh of man tingle. All I ask is time. It may not come to me
within the hour, but----”

“Here's one that hath come to thee, my man, and he will listen to all
you have to say: I hear the sound of his horse on the lane,” cried the
miller.

Jake Pullsford sprang from the settle, and strained himself to look out
of the window.

“Right; 'tis Mr. Wesley, in very deed,” he said.

“That's as should be,” cried Pritchard, with an air of satisfaction that
made the others feel the more astonished.

And when Wesley had entered and greeted his-friends, including the
water-finder, they were a good deal more astonished at the attitude
taken by Pritchard. Without wasting time over preliminaries, he assumed
that Wesley had come to the Mill in order not to admonish him, but to be
admonished by him. Before Mr. Wesley had time to say more than a
word, Pritchard had become fluent on the subject of the preacher's
responsibilities. It was not for Mr. Wesley to go wandering in the
uttermost parts of Cornwall, he said; he should have remained at
Porthawn to consolidate the work that he had begun; had he done so until
he had gathered in every soul, the Lord might have been as merciful to
the world as He had been to Nineveh in the days of Jonah. But Mr. Wesley
had, like Jonah, fled from his duty, and the next Monday was to be the
Day of Judgment.

Wesley listened gravely until the man got upon his feet and with an
outstretched finger toward him, cried:

“I have been mocked by some, and held in silent despite by others--all
of them professing to be of the Household of Faith, because the Spirit
of prophecy came upon me, and I announced the truth. Nor, Mr. Wesley,
will you dare to join with the disbelievers and say straight out that
the first Monday will not be the Last Day that will dawn on this world?”

“No,” said Wesley, “I would not be so presumptuous as to lay claim to
any knowledge that would entitle me to speak on a subject of such awful
import. '_Ye know not the day nor the hour_'--those were the words of
our Lord, and anyone who makes profession of knowing either, commits a
grievous sin.”

“Ay, anyone but me,” said Pritchard. “But the revelation was made to
me--I take no glory to myself. The great and terrible Day of the Lord
cometh next Monday, and they shall cry unto the rocks to fall on them
and the mountains to cover them. What other place could that refer to if
not Ruthallion and Porthawn; is't not that Buthallion is in the heart of
the hills and Porthawn the place of rocks?”

With all gentleness Wesley spoke to the man of the great need there was
for caution on the part of anyone venturing to assign times and seasons
to such prophecies as had been uttered respecting the mystery of
the Last Judgment. He tried to show him that however strong his own
conviction was on the subject of the Revelation, he should hold his
peace, for fear of a mistake being made and enemies being afforded a
reason for railing against the cause which they all had at heart. The
interpretation of prophecy, he said, was at all times difficult and
should certainly not be lightly attempted even by those men who had
spent all their lives dealing with the subject, with the light of
history to guide them. Nothing could exceed the tact, patience and
gentleness with which the pastor pleaded with this erring one of his
flock--the miller and Jake Pullsford were amazed at his forbearance;
they learned a lesson from him which they never forgot. He was patient
and said no word of offence all the time that they were waxing irritable
at the foolishness of the man who sat shaking his head now and again,
and pursing out his lips after the manner of pig-headed ignorance when
objecting to the wisdom of experience.

It was all to no purpose that Wesley spoke. The man listened, but
criticised with the smile of incredulous superiority on his face almost
all the time that Wesley was speaking--it varied only when he was
shaking his head, and then throwing it back defiantly. It was all to no
purpose.

“You are right, Mr. Wesley, in some ways,” he cried. “But you talk of
the interpretation of prophecy. Well, that is within your sphere, and I
durstn't stop you so far. Ay, but I am not an interpreter of prophecy--I
am the very prophet himself. Friends, said not I the truth to you this
hour past--how I felt as it were a burst of flame within me, whereby I
knew that I had been possessed of the spirit of prophecy? The gift of
water-finding, which has been mine since my youth, was only bestowed
upon the major prophets, Moses being the chief; and when I read of
Elijah, who in the days of the grievous water famine was enabled by
the exercise of his gift, and guided by the hand of the Lord, to find
water--even the running brook Chereth--in the midst of a land that was
dusty dry, all unworthy doubt was set at rest. Is it not written that
Elijah, the prophet, was to come back to earth to warn the people of the
Great Day being at hand?”

“Dear friend, stay thy tongue for a moment--say not words that might not
be forgiven thee even by the Most Merciful,” cried Wesley.

“You are a great preacher and a faithful servant--up to a certain point,
Mr. Wesley; but you are not as I am,” replied Pritchard firmly, but not
without a tone of tenderness. “You are a preacher; I am the prophet. I
have spoken as Jonah spoke to the men of Nineveh: 'Yet forty days
and Nineveh shall be overthrown.' 'In eleven days the world shall be
overthrown,' said I, feeling the flame within me.”

“The people of Nineveh repented and the destruction was averted,” said
Wesley. “Have there been signs of a great repentance among the people
who got tidings of your prediction?”

“My prophecy has everywhere been received with ridicule,” replied the
man proudly.

“I can testify to that,” said Jake Pullsford. “I travel about, as you
know, and I hear much of what is talked over from here to Devon, and
only for a few light-headed women--ready to believe that the moon was
the sun if they were told so from the pulpit--only for these, it might
be said that Dick's foolishness would ha' fallen on ears as deaf as an
adders.”

“I, myself, can bear witness to the evil effect that has been produced
among a people who were, I hoped, ready for the sowing of the good
seed,” said Wesley. “It was a great sorrow to me to hear the lightness
of talk--the offer of wagers--the excuse of drunkenness--all the result
of Richard Pritchard's indiscretion.”

“And everywhither it has been received as coming from us--from us
whom you have instructed in the Truth, sir,” said Jake. “'Tis not Dick
Pritchard that has been ridiculed, but we whom they call Methodists.
That is the worst of it.”

“And now that I have paved the way for you, the preacher, Mr. Wesley,
you will be able for three days to exhort the people to repentance,”
 said Pritchard, with the air of a man accustomed to give advice on grave
matters, with confidence that his advice would be followed.

“My duty is clear,” said Wesley. “I shall have to disclaim all sympathy
with the statements made by Richard Pritchard. Souls are not to be
terrorised to seek salvation. I am not one of those ministers who think
that the painting of lurid pictures of the destruction of the earth and
all that is therein the best way of helping poor sinners. Nay, there
have come under mine own eyes many instances of the very temporary
nature of conversions brought about by that paradox of the gospel of
terror. But need we look for guidance any further away than the history
of Jonah and the Ninevites? The prophet preached destruction, and
the people repented. But how long did the change last? The fire and
brimstone had to be rained down upon them before the sackcloth that they
assumed was worn out.”

“On Monday the fire and brimstone will overwhelm the whole world,
and woe be to him that preacheth not from that text till then!” cried
Pritchard. He was standing at one end of the table facing the window
that had a western aspect, and as he spoke, the flaming beams of the
sinking sun streamed through the glass and along the table until they
seemed to envelop him. In spite of the smallness of his stature he
seemed, with the sunbeams striking him, to possess some heroic elements.
The hand that he uplifted was thin and white, and it trembled in the
light. His face was illuminated, not from without only; his eyes were
large and deep, and they seemed staring at some object just outside the
window.

Watching him thus, everyone in the room turned toward the window--Wesley
was the only exception; he kept his eyes fixed upon the man at the
foot of the table. He saw his eyes move as if they were following the
movements of someone outside, and their expression varied strangely.
But they were the eyes of a man who is the slave of his nerves--of a
visionary who is carried away by his own ill-balanced imagination--of the
mystic who can see what he wishes to see.

Wesley was perplexed watching this man whose nature seemed to have
completely changed within the month. He had had a good deal of strange
experience of nervous phases, both in men and women who had been
overcome by his preaching, but he had never before met with a case that
was so strange as this. The man was no impostor; an impostor would have
been easy to deal with. He was a firm believer in his own mission and in
his own powers, and therein lay the difficulty of suppressing him.

And while Wesley watched him, and everyone else seemed striving to catch
a glimpse of the object on which the man's eyes were fixed, the light
suddenly passed out of his eyes and they became like those of a newly
dead man, staring blankly at that vision which comes before the sight
of a soul that is in the act of passing from the earth into the great
unknown Space. There he stood with his hand still upraised, and that
look of nothingness in his staring eyes..

Wesley sprang up from the table to support him when he fell, and he
appeared to be tottering after the manner of a man who has been shot
through the heart while on his feet; and Wesley's movement caused the
others to turn toward the man.

In a second the miller was behind him with outstretched arms ready to
support him. Pritchard did not fall just then, however. Breathlessly
and in a strained silence, the others watched him while he swayed to
the extent of a hand's breadth from side to side, still with his hand
upraised and rigid. For some minutes--it might have been five--he stood
thus, and in the end he did not collapse. He went slowly and rigidly
backward into Wesley's arms, and then down into his own chair, his eyes
still open--still blankly staring, devoid of all expression.

“Dead--can he be dead?” whispered Jake, slipping a hand under his
waistcoat.

Wesley shook his head.

“He is not dead, but in a trance,” he replied.




CHAPTER XII

For half an hour the four men in that room sat watching with painful
interest the one who sat motionless in the chair at the end of the
table. There was not one of them that had not a feeling of being a
watcher by the side of a bed on which a dead body was lying. Not a
word was exchanged between them. In the room there was a complete
silence--the silence of a death chamber. The sound of the machinery of
the mill--the creaking of the wooden wheels, and the rumbling of the
grindstones--went on in dull monotony in the mill, and from the kitchen,
beyond the oaken door, there came the occasional clink of a pan or
kettle; and outside the building there was the clank of the horses of a
waggon, and the loud voices of the waggoners talking to the men in one
of the lofts, and now and again directing the teams. A cock was crowing
drowsily at intervals in the poultry run, and once there was a quacking
squabble amongst the ducks on the Mill race. And then, with the lowing
of the cows that were being driven to the milking shed, came the
laughter of a girl, passing the waggoners.

But in the room there was silence, and soon the dimness of twilight.

And then John Wesley prayed in a low voice.

*****

Enough light remained in the room to allow those watchers to see when
consciousness returned to the man's eyes: he was facing the window. But
before the expression of death changed to that of life, his arm, that
was still stiffly outstretched, and seeming all the more awkward since
he had ceased to be on his feet, fell with a startling thud upon the
edge of the table. It was as if a dead man had made a movement. Then his
eyes turned upon each in the room in turn. He drew a long breath.

“You are among friends, Dick; how feel you, my man?” said Jake
Pullsford, laying his hand upon Pritchard's that had fallen upon the
table.

“I saw it again--clear--quite clear, Jake,” said Pritchard.

“What saw ye, friend Dick?” asked Jake.

“The vision--the Vision of Patmos. The heavens rolled together like
a scroll--blackness at first--no mind o' man ever conceived of such
blackness--the plague of Egypt was snow-white to compare. And then 'twas
all flame--flame--flame. The smith's furnace hath but a single red eye
of fire, but its sharp brightness stings like a wasp. But this--oh,
millions upon millions of furnace eyes, and every eye accusing the world
beneath. Who can live with everlasting burning?--that was what the Voice
cried--I know not if it was the strong angel, or him that rode upon the
White Horse, but I heard it, and all the world heard it, and the most
dreadful and most unusuallest thing of all was the sight of that White
Horse, plunging and pawing with all the fiery flames around it and
above and below! And the Voice said, 'There shall be no more sea,' and
forthwith all the tide that had been flowing in hillocks into Porthawn
and teasing the pebbles where the shallows be, and lapping the Dog's
Teeth reef, wimpling around the spikes--all that tide of water, I say,
began to move out so that every eye could see it move, and the spikes
o' the reef began to grow as the water fell, till the bases of the rocks
appeared with monstrous weeds, thick as coiled snakes, and crawling
shells, monstrous mighty that a man might live in; and then I saw the
slime of the deep, thick as pitch and boiling and bubbling with the heat
below, even as pitch boils over the brazier when the boats lie bottom
up on the beach. And then I saw a mighty ship lying in the ooze--a ship
that had become a wreck, maybe a hundred years agone, half the timbers
rotted from the bends so that she was like some monster o' the deep with
its long ridges of ribs showing fleshless as a skeleton. And then
the Voice cried, 'The Sea gave up its Dead.'... You shall see it for
yourselves on Monday--ay, all that came before mine eyes.'Twas Mr.
Wesley preached on the great moving among the dry bones--they were dry
in that valley, but in the dread secret depths where the sea had been
these were damp with the slime of ages, and they crawled together, bone
unto bone, throwing off the bright green seaweeds that overlaid them
like shrouds of thin silk. They stood up together all in the flesh, and
I noted that their skin was the yellow pale skin of the drowned, like
the cheeks of a female who holds a candle in her hands and shades the
flame with one of her palms. Flame--I saw them all by the light of the
flaming sky, and some of them put up their saffron hands between their
faces and the flame, but the light shone through their flesh as you have
seen the sun shine through a sere leaf of chestnut in the autumn.”

He stopped suddenly and drew a long breath. For some moments he breathed
heavily. No one in the room spoke. A boy went past the door outside
whistling.

When the man spoke again it was in a whisper. He turned to Wesley.

“Mr. Wesley, I knew not that I had the gift until I heard you preach,”
 he said. “I only suspected now and again when I felt the twitchings of
the twig between my hands when I was finding the water, that I was not
as other men; but when I heard you preach and saw how you carried all
who listened away upon your words as though they were not words, but a
wave of the sea, and the natural people the flotsam of the waste, I
felt my heart swell within me by reason of the knowledge that I had been
chosen to proclaim something great beyond even all that you could teach.
And now 'tis left for you to stand by my side and tell all that have
ears to hear to prepare for the Great Day. It is coming--Monday. I would
that we had a longer space, Sir, for, were it so, my name would go forth
through all the world as yours has done--nay, with more honour, for a
prophet is ahead of the mere preacher. But you will do your best for the
world in the time allowed to us, will you not, Mr. Wesley?”

He laid his hand on one of Wesley's, firmly and kindly.

“My poor brother!” said Wesley gently. “God forgive me if I have been
the means of causing hurt to even the weakest of my brethren. Let us
live, dear brother, as if our days in the world were not to be longer
than this week, giving our thoughts not to ourselves, but to God;
seeking for no glory to attach to our poor names, but only to the Name
at which every knee must bow. Humility--let us strive after humility.
What are we but dust?”

The man looked at him--there was still some light in the room--and after
the lapse of a few moments he said:

“You have spoke a great truth, Mr. Wesley. Humility is for all of us.
Pray that I may attain it, brother. It should come easy enough to some
that we know, but for such as you and me, especially me, dear
brother, 'tis not so easy. The gift of prophecy surely raises a humble
man into circumstances so lofty that he is above the need for any abject
demeanour. Ay, now that I reflect on't, I am not sure that I have any
right to be humble. 'Twould be like flouting a gift in the face of the
giver. 'Twould be like a servant wearing a ragged coat when his master
hath provided him with a fine suit of livery.”

He had risen from his place, and now he remarked that the evening had
come and he had far to travel. He gave Wesley his hand, nodded to the
others and went through the door without another word.

The men whom he left in the room drew long breaths. One of them--the
farmer--made a sound with his tongue against his teeth as one might do
when a child too young to know better breaks a saucer. The miller gave
an exclamation that went still further, showing more of contempt and
less of pity. Mr. Hartwell, the mine-owner, who was a quiet, well-read
man, said:

“I have heard of cases like to his; I have been reading of revivals,
as some call such an awakening as has taken place through Mr. Wesley's
preaching, and every one of them has been followed by the appearance
of men not unlike Dick Pritchard in temper--men who lose themselves
in their zeal--get out of their depth--become seized by an ambition to
teach others before they themselves have got through the primer.”

“For me, I call to mind naught but the magic men of Egypt,” said Jake
Pullsford. “They were able to do by their traffic with the Evil One all
that Moses did by miracle. I always had my doubts about the power that
Dick Pritchard professed--finding water by the help of his wand of
hazel--as 'twere a wizard's wand--maybe the staves of the Egyptian
sorcerers were of hazel--I shouldn't wonder. And now he falls into
a trance and says he sees a vision, equalling himself to St. John at
Patmos! For myself I say that I never knew of a truly godly man falling
into a trance. My grandfather--you are old enough to remember him,
farmer?”

“I mind him well--pretty stiff at a bargain up to the end,” said the
farmer with a side nod of acquiescence.

“We be talking of the same man,” resumed the miller. “Well, I say that
he told me of one such mystical vision seer that came from Dorset in his
young days, and he saw so many things that he was at last tried for
sorcery and burnt in the marketplace. Ah, those were the days when men
wasn't allowed by law to go so far as they do now-a-days. Why, 'tis only
rarely that we hear of a witch burning in these times.”

Wesley held up his hand.

“I had my misgivings in regard to Pritchard from the first,” he said.
“And when I got news that he had been causing you trouble I felt that he
had indeed been an agent of the Evil One. But now--God forbid that I
should judge him in haste. I scarce know what to think about him. I have
heard of holy men falling into trances and afterwards saying things that
were profitable to hear. I am in doubt. I must pray for guidance.”

“The man is to be pitied,” said Mr. Hartwell.

“You heard the uplifted way he talked at the last--like a fool full of
his own conceit? Have you heard yet, Mr. Wesley, what an effect his
prediction has had upon the country?”

“I heard naught of it until I had entered the parlour at the inn where
I dined to-day, but I think I heard enough to allow of my forming some
notion of the way his prediction was received. Some were jocular over
it, a few grave, and a large number ribald.”

“You have described what I myself have noticed, sir,” said Mr. Hartwell.
“Only so far as I can see there are a large number who are well-nigh
mad through fear. Now what we may be sure of is that these people, when
Monday passes, will turn out open scoffers at the truth. And you may
be certain that your opponents will only be too glad of the opportunity
thereby afforded them of discrediting your labours; they will do their
best to make Methodism responsible for the foolishness and vanity of
that man?”

“I perceived that that would be so the moment I got your letter,”
 said Wesley. “And yet--I tell you, brethren, that I should be slow to
attribute any imposture to this man, especially since I have heard him
speak in this room. He believes that he has been endowed by Heaven with
the gift of prophecy.”

“And he only acknowledges it to boast,” said Mr. Hartwell. “It is his
foolish boasting that I abhor most, knowing, as I do full well, that
every word that comes from him will be used against us, and tend to cast
discredit upon the cause which we have at heart.”

Wesley perceived how true was this view of the matter, but still he
remained uncertain what course to adopt in the circumstances. He knew
that it was the fervour of his preaching that had affected Pritchard, as
it had others; he had heard reports of the spread of a religious mania
at Bristol after he had preached there for some time; but he had always
succeeded in tracing such reports to those persons who had ridiculed his
services. This wras the first time that he was brought face to face with
one who had been carried away by his zeal to a point of what most people
would be disposed to term madness.

He had known that there would be considerable difficulty dealing with
the case of Pritchard, but he had also believed that the man would
become submissive if remonstrated with. It had happened, however, that,
so far from becoming submissive, Pritchard had reasserted himself,
and with so much effect that Wesley found himself sympathising with
him--pitying him, and taking his part in the face of the others who were
apparently but little affected by the impassioned account the man had
given of his vision when in the trance.

It was not until the night had fallen that they agreed with Wesley that
it might be well to wait for a day or two in order that he should become
acquainted with some of the effects of the prediction, and thus be in
a position to judge whether or not he should take steps to dissociate
himself and his mission from the preaching of the man Pritchard.

He had not, however, gone further than Port-hawn the next day before he
found out that the impression produced by the definite announcement that
the Day of Judgment was but forty-eight hours off was very much deeper
than he had fancied. He found the whole neighbourhood seething with
excitement over the prophecy. It had been made by Pritchard, he learned,
in the course of a service which had been held in a field on the first
Sunday after Wesley's departure, and it had been heard by more than a
thousand of the people whom Wesley's preaching had aroused from lethargy
to a living sense of responsibility. Religious fervour had taken hold
upon the inhabitants of valley and coast, and under its influence
extravagance and exuberance were rife. Only at such a time would
Pritchard's new-found fervour have produced any lasting impression, but
in the circumstances his assumption of the mantle of the prophet and his
delivery of the solemn warning had had among the people the effect of
a firebrand flung among straw. He had shouted his words of fire to
an inflammable audience, and his picture of the imminent terror had
overwhelmed them. The shrieks of a few hysterical women completed what
his prediction had begun, and before the evening the valley of the Lana
was seething with the news that the world was coming to an end within
the month.

All this Wesley heard before he left the Mill, and before he had ridden
as far as the coast village he had ample confirmation of the accuracy
of the judgment of his friends, who had assured him that the cause which
they had at heart was likely to suffer through the vanity of Pritchard.
He also perceived that the man had good reason for being puffed up on
observing the effect of his deliverance. In a moment he had leaped into
notoriety from being a nonentity. It seemed as if he had been ashamed of
hearing his own voice a short time before, and this fact only made him
appear a greater marvel to himself as well as to the people who had
heard him assume the character of a prophet of fire and brimstone. It
was no wonder, Wesley acknowledged, that the man's head had been turned.

The worst of the matter was that he was referred, to by nearly all
the countryside as Wesley's deputy. Even the most devoted of Wesley's
hearers seemed to have accepted Pritchard as the exponent of the methods
adopted by Wesley to get the ears of the multitude. In their condition
of blind fervour they were unable to differentiate between the zeal of
the one to convey to them the living Truth and the excess of the other.
They were in the condition of the French mob, who, fifty years later,
after being stirred by an orator, might have gone to think over their
wrongs for another century had not a madman lighted a torch and pointed
to the Bastille.

It was only to be expected that the opponents of the great awakening
begun by Wesley should point to the extravagance of Pritchard and call
it the natural development of Methodism. Wesley's crusade had been
against the supineness of the Church of England, they said; but how much
more preferable was this supineness to the blasphemy of Methodism as
interpreted by the charlatan who arrogated to himself the power of a
prophet!

He was pained as he had rarely been since his American accusers had
forced him to leave Georgia, when he found what a hold the prediction
had got on the people. He had evidence of the extent of Pritchard's
following even during his ride to Port-hawn. At the cross roads, not two
miles from the Mill, he came upon a large crowd being preached to by a
man whom he had never seen before, and the text was the Judgment Day.
The preacher was fervid and illiterate. He became frantic, touching
upon the terror that was to come on Monday; and his hearers were
shrieking--men as, well as women. Some lay along the ground sobbing
wildly, others sang a verse of a hymn in frenzy.

Further along the road a woman was preaching repentance--in another
two days it would be too late; and in the next ditch a young woman was
making a mock of her, putting a ribald construction upon what she was
saying. Further on still he came to a tavern, outside which there was a
large placard announcing that the world would only last till Monday, and
having unfortunately a large stock of beer and rum in fine condition,
the innkeeper was selling off the stock at a huge reduction in the price
of every glass of liquor.

Wesley had no difficulty in perceiving the man's generosity was being
appreciated. The bar was crowded with uproarious men and women, and some
were lying helpless on the stones of the yard.

On the wall of a disused smithy a mile or two nearer the coast there was
chalked up the inscription:

“The Methodys have bro' about the Ende of the World. Who will bring
about the Ende of the Methodys? Downe with them all, I saye.”

He rode sadly onward, with bowed head. He felt humiliated, feeling that
the object for which he lived was humiliated.

And the worst of the matter was, he saw, that these people who were
making a mock of the Truth, some consciously, others unconsciously, were
not in a condition to lend an ear to any remonstrance that might come
from him. The attitude assumed by Pritchard was, Wesley knew, typical
of that which would be taken up by his followers, and the mockers would
only be afforded a new subject for ridicule.

“Is it I--is it I who am an unprofitable servant?” he cried out of
the depth of his despondency. “Is it I that have been the cause of the
enemy's blasphemy? What have I done that I should be made a witness of
this wreckage of all that I hoped to see accomplished through my work?”

For some time he felt as did the man who cried “It is enough! I am not
better than my fellows.”

He let his rein drop on his horse's neck when approaching the house
where he was to be a guest. The day was one of grey mists rolling from
the sea through the valley, spreading wisps of gauze over the higher
slopes, which soon whirled into muslin scarfs with an occasional ostrich
plume shot through with sunshine. At times a cataract of this grey sea
vapour would plunge over the slopes of a gorge and spread abroad into
a billowy lake that swirled round the basin of the valley and then
suddenly lifted, allowing a cataract of sunshine to pour down into the
hollows which were dewy damp from the mist.

It was a strange atmosphere with innumerable changes from minute to
minute.

“For me the shadows of the mist--the shadows touched by no ray of
sunshine,” he cried when he felt the cold salt breath of the vapour upon
his face.

And then he bowed his head and prayed that the shadows might flee away
and the Daystar arise once more to lighten the souls of the people as he
had hoped that they would be enlightened.

When he unclosed his eyes, after that solemn space in which a man
stretches out weak hands, “groping blindly in the darkness,” hoping that
they will touch God's right hand in that darkness and be guided into a
right path, he saw the tall figure of a man standing on a crag watching
him.

The man had the aspect of a statue of stone looking out of a whirl of
sea-mist.

Wesley saw that it was Bennet, the man by whom he had been met when he
was walking through this Talley for the first time with Nelly Polwhele.
He had heard a great deal about the man during the few weeks that he
had sojourned in the neighbourhood. He found that he was a man of some
education--certainly with a far more intimate knowledge of the classics
than was possessed by most of the parsons west of Exeter. He had been a
schoolmaster in Somerset, but his erratic habits had prevented him from
making any position for himself. He had become acquainted with Nelly
Polwhele at Bristol, and his devotion to her amounted almost to a
madness. It was all to no purpose that she refused to listen to him;
he renewed his suit in season and out of season until his persistence
amounted to persecution. Of course Nelly found many self-constituted
champions, and Bennet was attacked and beaten more than once when off
his guard. When, however, he was prepared for their assault he had shown
himself to be more than a match for the best of them. The fact that he
had disabled for some weeks two of his assailants did not make him any
more popular than he had been in the neighbourhood.

There he stood looking at Wesley, and there he remained for several
minutes, looking more than ever like a grey stone figure on a rough
granite pedestal.

It was not until Wesley had put his horse in motion that the man held up
one hand, saying:

“Give me one minute, Mr. Wesley. I know that you are not afraid of me.
Why should you be?”

“Why, indeed?” said Wesley. “I know not why I should fear you, seeing
that I fear no man who lives on this earth?”

“You came hither with a great blowing of trumpets, Mr. Wesley,” said
the man. “You were the one that was to overthrow all the old ways of the
Church--you were to make such a noise as would cause the good old dame
to awake from her slumber of a century. Well, you did cause her to
awake; but the noise that you made awoke more than that good mother, the
Church of England--it aroused a demon or two that had been slumbering in
these valleys, and they began to show what they could do. They did not
forget their ancient trick--an angel of light--isn't that the wiliest
sorcery of our ancient friend, the Devil, Mr. Wesley?”

“You should know, if you are his servant sent to mock me,” said Wesley.

“You have taught the people a religion of emotion, and can you wonder
that the Enemy has taken up your challenge and gone far beyond you
in the same direction? He found a ready tool and a ready fool in your
ardent disciple with the comical Welsh name--Richard Pritchard, to wit.
He has shown the people that you were too tame, and the water-finder
hath found fire to be more attractive as a subject than insipid water.
You are beaten out of the field, Mr. Wesley. As usual, the pupil hath
surpassed the master, and you find yourself in the second place.”

Wesley sat with his head bent down to his horse's neck. He made no reply
to the man's scoff; what to him was the scoffing of this man? When one
is sitting in the midst of the ruins of his house what matters it if the
wind blows over one a handful of dust off the roadside?

“John Wesley, the preacher, hath been deposed, and Pritchard, the
prophet, reigns in his stead,” the man went on. “Ay, and all the day you
have been saying to yourself, 'What have I done to deserve this? What
have I done to deserve this?' Dare you deny it, O preacher of the Gospel
of Truth?”

Wesley bowed his head once more.

“Mayhap you found no answer ready,” Bennet cried. “Then I'll let you
into the secret, John Wesley. You are being rightly punished because you
have been thinking more of the love of woman than of the Love of God.”

Wesley's head remained bent no longer.

“What mean you by that gibe, man?” he cried.

“Ask your own heart what I mean,” said the man fiercely. “Your own heart
knows full well that you sought to win the love of the woman who walked
with you on this road little more than a month ago, and who ministered
to you on the day of your great preaching--you took her love from those
to whom she owed it, and you have cherished, albeit you know that she
can never be a wife to you.”

“The Lord rebuke thee,” said Wesley, when the man made a pause.

“Nay, 'tis on you that the rebuke has fallen, and you know it, John
Wesley,” cried Bennet, more fiercely than ever. “Nelly Polwhele would
have come to love me in time had not you come between us--that I know--I
know it, I tell you, I know it--my love for her is so overwhelming
that she would not have been able to hold out against it. But you came,
and--answer me, man: when it was written to you that you were to return
hither in hot haste to combat the folly of Pritchard, did not your heart
exult with the thought singing through it, 'I shall see her again--I
shall be beside her once more'?”

Wesley started so that his horse sprang forward and the man before him
barely escaped being knocked down. But Bennet did not even pretend that
he fancied Wesley intended riding him down. He only laughed savagely,
saying:

“That start of yours tells me that I know what is in your heart better
than you do yourself. Well, it hath made a revelation to you now, Mr.
Wesley, and if you are wise you will profit by it. I tell you that if
you think of her again you are lost--you are lost. The first rebuke has
fallen upon you from above.'Tis a light one. But what will the second
be? Ponder upon that question, sir. Know that even now she is softening
toward me. Come not between us again. Man, the love of woman is not
for such as you, least of all the love of a child whose heart is as the
heart of the Spring season quivering with the joy of life. Now ride on,
sir, and ask your reason if I have not counselled you aright.”

He had spoken almost frantically at first; but his voice had fallen: he
had become almost calm while uttering his last sentences.

He took off his hat, stepped to one side, and pointed down the road.
He kept his arm stretched out and his fingers as an index, while Wesley
looked at him, as if about to make a reply.

But if Wesley meant to speak he relinquished his intention. He looked
at the man without a word, and without breaking the silence, urged his
horse forward and rode slowly away.




CHAPTER XIII

John Wesley had ample food for thought for the remainder of his
journey. He knew that the man who had appeared to him so suddenly out of
the mist had for some time been on the brink of madness through his wild
passion for Nelly Pol-whele, which brought about a frenzy of jealousy
in respect of any man whom he saw near the girl. The fierceness of his
gibes was due to this madness of his. But had the wretch stumbled in his
blindness over a true thing? Was it the truth that he, Wesley, had all.
unknown to himself drawn that girl close to him by a tenderer cord than
that which had caused her to minister to his needs after he had preached
his first great sermon?

The very idea of such a thing happening was startling to him. It would
have seemed shocking to him if it had not seemed incredible. How was it
possible, he asked himself, that that girl could have been drawn to love
him? What was he to attract the love of such a young woman? He was
in all matters save only one, cold and austere. He knew that his
austereness had been made the subject of ridicule--of caricature--at
Oxford and Bath and elsewhere. He had been called lugubrious by reason
of his dwelling so intently on the severer side of life, and he had
never thought it necessary to defend himself from such charges. He was
sure that they were not true.

That was the manner of man that he was, and this being so, how was it
possible that he should ever draw to himself the love of such a bright
creature as Nelly Polwhele? What was she? Why, the very opposite to him
in every respect. She was vivacious--almost frivolous; she had taken a
delight in all the gaieties of life--why, the first time he saw her she
had been in the act of imitating a notorious play-actress, and, what
made it worse, she was playing the part extremely well. To be sure she
had taken his reproof with an acknowledgment that it was deserved, and
she had of her own free will and under no pressure from him promised
that she would never again enter a playhouse; but still he knew that the
desire for such gaieties was not eradicated from her nature. It would be
unnatural to suppose' that it was. In short, she had nothing in common
with him, and to fancy that she had seen anything in him to attract her
love would be to fancy the butterfly in rapture around a thistle.

Oh, it was incredible that such a thing should happen. The notion was
the outcome of the jealousy of that wretch. Why, the first time that the
man had seen them together had he not burst out on them, accusing him
of stealing away the child's affection, although he had not been ten
minutes by her side?

Of course the notion was preposterous. He felt that it was so, and at
the same moment that this conviction came to him, he was conscious of a
little feeling of sadness to think that it was so. The more certain he
became on the matter the greater was the regret that he felt.

Was it curious that he should dwell upon what the man had said last
rather than upon what he had said first? But some time had passed
before he recalled the charge that Bennet had brought against him almost
immediately after they had met--the charge of having Nelly Polwhele in
his thoughts rather than the work with which he had been entrusted by
his Maker. The man had accused him of loving the girl, and declared that
his present trouble was the rebuke that he had earned.

He had been startled by this accusation. Was that because he did not
know all that was in his own heart? Could it be possible that he loved
Nelly Polwhele? Once before he had asked himself this question, and he
had not been able to assure himself as to how it should be answered,
before he received that letter calling him back to this neighbourhood;
and all thoughts that did not bear upon the subject of that' letter were
swept from his mind. He knew that he heard in his ear a quick whisper
that said:

“_You will be beside her again within four days_;” but only for a single
second had that thought taken possession of him. It had come to him with
the leap up of a candle flame before it is extinguished. That thought
had been quenched at the moment of its exuberance, and now he knew
that this accusation brought against him was false; not once--not for a
single moment, even when riding far into the evening through the lonely
places of the valley where he might have looked to feel cheered by such
a thought, had his heart whispered to him:

“_You will be beside her again within four days_.”

She had not come between him and the work which he had to do.

But now the man had said to him all that brought back his thoughts to
Nelly Polwhele; and having, as he fancied, answered the question which
he put to him respecting her loving him, he found himself face to face
with the Question of the possibility of his loving her.

It came upon him with the force of a blow; the logical outcome of his
first reflections:

“If I found it incredible that she could have any affection for me
because we have nothing in common, is not the same reason sufficient to
convince me that it is impossible I could love her?”

He was exceedingly anxious to assure himself that the feeling which he
had for her was not the love which a man has for a woman; but he did not
feel any great exultation on coming to this logical conclusion of his
consideration of the question which had been suggested to him by the
accusations of Bennet; on the contrary, he was conscious of a certain
plaintive note in the midst of all his logic--a plaintive human
note--the desire of a good man for the love of a good woman. He felt
very lonely riding down that valley of sea-mist permeated not with the
cold of the sea, but with the warmth of the sunlight that struck some of
the highest green ridges of the slopes above him. His logic had led him
only into his barren loneliness, until his sound mental training, which
compelled him to examine an argument from every standpoint, asserted
itself and he found that his logic was carrying him on still further,
for now it was saying to him:

“_If you, who have nothing in common with that young woman, have been
led to love her, what is there incredible in the suggestion that she has
been led to love you?_”

Then it was that he was conscious of a feeling of exultation. His own
heart seemed to be revealed to him in a moment. Only for a moment,
however; for he gave a cry, passing his hand athwart his face as if to
sweep away a film of mist from before his eyes.

“Madness--madness and disaster! The love of woman is not for such as
I--the man spoke the truth. The love of woman is not for me. Not for me
the sweet companionship, the fireside of home, the little cradle from
which comes the little cry--not for me--not for me!”

He rode on, and so docile had his mind become through the stern
discipline of years, not once did his thoughts stray to Nelly from
the grave matter which he had been considering when he encountered
bennet--not once did he think even of Bennet. What he had before him
was the question of what steps he should take to counteract the mischief
which had been done and was still being done by the man who had taken it
upon him to predict the end of the world.

A change seemed to have come over his way of looking at the matter.
Previously he had not seen his way clearly; the mist that was sweeping
through the valley seemed to have obscured his mental vision. He had
been aware of a certain ill-defined sympathy in regard to the man since
he had shown himself to be something of a mystic; his trance and, his
account of the vision that he had seen had urged Wesley's interest
into another channel, as it were; so that he found himself considering
somewhat dreamily the whole question of the trustworthiness of visions,
and then he had been able to agree with his friends at the Mill who had
certainly not taken very long to make up their minds as to how Pritchard
should be dealt with.

Now, however, Wesley seemed to see his way clearly. He became practical
in a moment. He perceived that it was necessary for him to dissociate
himself and his system from such as Pritchard--men who sought to play
solely upon the emotions of their hearers, and who had nothing of the
Truth to offer them however receptive their hearers' hearts had become.
He did not doubt that Pritchard would take credit to himself for the
non-fulfilment of his prophecy. He would bring forward the case of Jonah
and Nineveh. Jonah had said definitely that Nineveh would be destroyed
on a certain day; but the inhabitants had been aroused to repent, and
the city's last day had been deferred. He would take credit to himself
for arresting the Day of Judgment, his prophecy having brought about the
repentance of his neighbours at Porthawn and Ruthallion, and thus the
fact of his prophecy not being realised would actually add to the
fame which he had already achieved, and his harmfulness would be
proportionately increased.

Wesley knew that not much time was left to him and his friends to take
action as it seemed right to him. The day was Friday, and he would
preach on Sunday and state his views in respect of Pritchard and his
following, so that it should be known that he discountenanced their
acts. He had seen and heard enough during his ride through the valley to
let him know how imminent was disaster to the whole system of which he
was the exponent.

He had succeeded in banishing from his mind every thought which he had
had in regard to Nelly Polwhele; so that it was somewhat disturbing for
him to come upon her close to the entrance gates to the Court. She was
carrying a wicker bird cage containing two young doves; he heard her
voice talking to the birds before he recognised her. For a moment lie
felt that he should stop his horse and allow her to proceed so far in
front of him that she should reach the village without his overtaking
her; but a moment's reflection was enough to assure him that to act in
this way would be cowardice. He had succeeded in banishing her from
his mind, and that gave him confidence in his own power to abide by the
decision to which he had come respecting her. To avoid her at this time
would have been to confess to himself that he was not strong enough to
control his own heart; and he believed that he was strong enough to do
so. Therefore he found himself once more beside her and felt that he was
without a trouble in the world.

Of course she became very red when he spoke her name and stooped from
his saddle to give her his hand. She had blushed in the same way an hour
before when old Squire Trevelyan had found her with his daughters and
said a kindly word to her.

“I have been to my young ladies,” she said, “and see what they have
given to me, sir.” She held up the cage and the birds turned their heads
daintily in order to eye him. “They were found in a nest by one of the
keepers, and as my ladies are going to London they gave the little birds
to me. I hope they will thrive under my care.”

“Why should they not?” he said. “You will be a mother to them and they
will teach you.”

She laughed with a puzzled wrinkle between her eyes.

“Teach me, sir?”

“Ay, they will teach you, I would fain hope, how becoming is a sober
shade of dress even to the young.”

“Do I need to be taught such a lesson, Mr. Wesley?” she cried, and
now her face was in need of such a lesson. She spoke as if hurt by his
suggestion.

“I have never seen you dressed except modestly and as is becoming to
a young woman,” he replied. “Indeed I meant not what I said to be a
reproach. I only said what came first to mind when I saw those dainty
well-dressed creatures. My thought was: 'Her association with such
companions will surely prevent her from yielding to the weakness of most
young women. She will see that the dove conveys gentleness to the mind,
whereas the peacock is the type of all that is to be despised.' Then, my
dear child, the pair of turtle doves is an emblem of sacrifice.”

“Is that why they were chosen as the symbols of love?” said the girl,
after a pause.

He looked at her curiously for some time. He wondered what was in her
mind. Had she gone as far as her words suggested in her knowledge of
what it meant to love?

“I think that there can be no true love without self-sacrifice,” said
he. “'Tis the very essence--the spiritual part of love.”

“Is It so in verity, sir?” she cried. “Now I have ever thought that what
is called love is of all things the most selfish. Were it not so why
should it provoke men to quarrel--nay, the quarrelling is not only on
the side of the men. I have seen sisters up in arms simply because the
lover of one had given a kindly glance to the other.”

“To be ready to sacrifice one's self to save the loved one from
disaster--from trouble in any shape or form--that is the love that is
true, he assured of that, Nelly,” said he. “Love, if it be true, will
help one to do one's duty--to our Maker as well as to our fellow-men,
and to do that duty without a thought of whatever sacrifices it may
demand. Love, if it be true, will not shrink from the greatest sacrifice
that can be demanded of it--separation from the one who is beloved--a
dividing asunder forever. That is why it is the noblest part of a man's
nature, and that is why it should not be lightly spoken of as is done
daily.”

“Ah, sir,” she said, “that may be the love that poets dream of; I have
read out of poetry books to my ladies at the Court, when they were
having their hair brushed. There was the poet Waller, whom they liked to
have read to them, and Mr. Pope, in places. Mr. Marlowe they had a great
regard for. They all put their dreams of love into beautiful words that
would make the coldest of us in love with love. But for the real thing
for daily life I think that simple folk must needs be content with the
homelier variety.”

“There is only one sort of love, and that is love,” said he. “'Tis a
flower that blooms as well in a cottage garden as in the parterres of a
palace--nay, there are plants that thrive best in a poor soil, becoming
stunted and losing their fragrance in rich ground, and it hath oft
seemed to me that love is such a growth.”

“And yet I have heard it said that love flies out at the window when
poverty comes in by the door,” she said.

“That never was love; 'twas something that came in the disguise of
love.”

“I do believe that there are many such sham things prowling about, and
knocking at such doors as they find well painted. Some of them have
heard of silver being stored away in old jugs, and some have gone round
to the byres to see exactly how many cows were there before knocking at
the door.”

He smiled in response to her smiling. And then suddenly they both became
grave.

“Have you had recent converse with that man Bennet?” he asked suddenly.

She swung the bird cage so quickly round that the doves were well-nigh
jerked off their perch. She had flushed at the same moment, and a little
frown was upon the face that she turned up to him.

“Why asked you that question? Is it because you were speaking of the
sham loves, sir?” she asked.

“I ask your pardon if I seem somewhat of a busybody, Nelly Polwhele,”
 he said. “But the truth is that I--I find myself thinking of you at
times--as a father--as an elder brother might think of--a sweet sister
of tender years.”

Now she was blushing rosier than before, and there was no frown upon
her forehead. But she did not lower her eyes or turn them away from his
face. There was about her no sign of the bashful country girl who has
been paid a compliment by one above her in rank. She did not lower her
eyes; it was he who lowered his before her.

“'Tis the truth, dear child, that I tell you: I have been strangely
interested in you since the first day I saw you, and I have oft wondered
what your future would be. I have thought of you in my prayers.”

“I do not deserve so much from you, sir,” she said softly, and now her
eyes were on the ground, and he knew by the sound of her voice that they
were full of tears. She spoke softly--jerkily. “I do not deserve so much
that is good, though if I were asked what thing on earth I valued most I
should say that it was that you should think well of me.”

“How could I think otherwise, Nelly?” he asked. “You gave me your
promise of your own free will, not to allow any further longing after
the playhouse to take possession of you, and I know that you have kept
that promise. You never missed a preaching and you were ever attentive.
I do not doubt that the seed sown in your heart will bear good fruit.
Then you were thoughtful for my comfort upon more than one occasion
and--Why should you not dwell in my thoughts? Why should you not be
associated with my hopes? Do you think that there is any tenderer
feeling than that which a shepherd has for one of his lambs that he has
turned into the path that leads to the fold?”

“I am unworthy, sir, I have forgotten your teaching even before your
words had ceased to sound in mine ears. I have not scrupled to deceive.
I led on John Bennet to believe that I might relent toward him, when all
the time I detested him.”

“Why did you do that?” he asked gravely.

“It was to induce him to come to hear you preach, Mr. Wesley,” she
replied. “I thought that it was possible if he heard you preach that he
might change his ways as so many others have changed theirs, and so I
was led to promise to allow him to walk home with me if he came to the
preaching. I felt that I was doing wrong at the time, though it did not
seem so bad as it does now.”

“But you did not give him any further promise?”

“None--none whatsoever. And when I found that he was unaffected by your
preaching I refused him even the small favour--he thought it a
favour--which I had granted him before. But I knew that I was
double-dealing, and indeed I have cried over the thought of it, and when
I heard that you were coming back I resolved to confess it all to you.”

“I encountered the man not more than half an hour ago,” said he.

She seemed to be surprised.

“Then he has broken the promise which he made to me,” she cried. “He
gave me his word to forsake this neighbourhood for two months, at least,
and I believed that he went away.”

“By what means were you able to obtain such a promise from him?” asked
Wesley.

She was silent for some time--silent and ill at ease. At last she said
slowly:

“I fear that I was guilty of double dealing again. I believe he went
away with the impression that I would think with favour of him.”

“I fear that you meant to convey such an impression to him, Nelly.”

“I cannot deny it sir. I admit it. But I got rid of him. Oh, if you knew
how he persecuted me you would not be hard on me.”

“My poor child, who am I that I should condemn you? I do not say that
you were not wrong to deceive him as you did; the fact that your own
conscience tells you that you were wrong proves that you were.”

“I do not desire to defend myself, sir; and perhaps it was also wrong
for me to think as I have been thinking during the past week or two that
just as it is counted an honourable thing for a general in battle to
hoodwink his enemy, so it may not be quite fair to a woman to call her
double dealing for using the wits that she has for her own protection.
Were we endowed with wits for no purpose, do you think, Mr. Wesley?”

Mr. Wesley, the preacher of austerity, settled his countenance--not
without difficulty--while he kept his eyes fixed upon the pretty face
that looked up innocently to his own. He shook his head and raised a
finger of reproof. He began to speak with gravity, his intention being
to assure her of the danger there was trying to argue against the
dictates of one's conscience. If cunning was the gift of Nature,
Conscience was the gift of God--that was in his mind when he began to
speak.

“Child,” he began, “you are in peril; you

“A woman,” she cried. “I am a woman, and I know that there are
some--they are all men--who assert that to be a woman is to be incapable
of understanding an argument--so that----”

“To be a woman is to be a creature that has no need of argument because
feeling is ever more potent than argument,” said he. “To be a woman is
to be a creature of feeling; of grace, of tenderness--of womanliness. If
your conscience tells you that you were wrong to deceive John Bennet,
be sure that you were wrong; but Heaven forbid that I should condemn you
for acting as your womanly wit prompted. And may Heaven forgive me if
I speak for once as a man rather than a preacher. 'Tis because I have
spoken so that I--I--oh, if I do not run away at once there is no
knowing where I may end. Fare thee well, child; and be sure--oh, be sure
that your conscience is your true director, not your woman's wits--and
least of all, John Wesley, the preacher.”

He laid his hand tenderly upon her head; then suddenly drew it back with
a jerk as if he had been stung upon the palm. His horse started, and he
made no attempt to restrain it, even when it began to canter. In a few
seconds he had gone round the bend on the road beneath the trees that
overhung the wall of the Trevelyan demesne.

He had reached the house where he was to lodge before he recollected
that although he had been conversing with Nelly Polwhele for close upon
twenty minutes--although they had touched upon some topics of common
interest, neither of them had referred even in the most distant way
to the matter which had brought about his return to the neighbourhood;
neither of them had so much as mentioned the name of Pritchard, or
referred to his prophecy of the End of all things.

As a matter of fact a whole hour had passed before John Wesley
remembered that it was necessary for him to determine as speedily as
possible what form his protest against the man and his act should take.

His sudden coming upon Nelly Polwhele had left a rather disturbing
impression upon him--at first a delightfully disturbing impression, and
then one that added to the gravity of his thoughts--in fact just such a
complex impression as is produced upon an ordinary man when coming out
of the presence of the woman whom he loves, he knows not why.

The sum of his reflections regarding their meeting was that while he
had an uneasy feeling that he had spoken too impulsively to her at the
moment of parting from her, yet altogether he was the better of having
been with her. A cup of cool water in the desert--those were the words
that came to him when he was alone in his room. After the horrible
scenes that he had witnessed while riding through the valley--after the
horrible torture to which he had been subjected by the gibes of John
Bennet--she had appeared before his weary eyes, so fresh, so sweet, so
gracious! Truly he was the better for being near her, and once more he
repeated the word:

“A cup of cool water in the desert land.”




CHAPTER XIV

Wesley lost no time in announcing to his friends the decision to which
he had come. He was to preach on Sunday at the place where his first
meeting had been held, and he felt sure that his congregation would
be sufficiently large for his purpose, which was to let it be known
throughout the country that he and all those who were associated with
him in his work in Cornwall discountenanced Pritchard in every way. To
be sure there was very little time left to them to spread abroad the
news that Mr. Wesley had returned and would preach on Sunday. Only a
single day remained to them, and that was not enough to allow of the
announcement being made outside an area of twenty-five or thirty miles
from Porthawn; but when Mr. Hartwell and Jake Pullsford shook their
heads and doubted if this preaching would bring together more than a few
hundred people, these being the inhabitants of the villages and hamlets
within a mile or two of Porthawn, Wesley explained that all that was
necessary to be done would be accomplished even by a small congregation.
All that should be aimed at was to place it on record that Pritchard had
done what he had done on his own responsibility and without any previous
consultation with the leader of the movement with which he had been
associated. But, of course, the more people who would be present the
more fully his object would be accomplished, and Wesley's friends sent
their message with all speed and in every direction.

“I would fain believe that the news of this distressing folly of
Pritchard's has not spread very far abroad,” said Wesley. “I travelled,
as you know, through a large portion of the country on my return, and
yet it was not until I had reached the head of the valley that the least
whisper of the matter reached me; I would fain hope that the trouble
will be only local.”

“Those who are opposed to us will take the best of care to prevent it
from being circumscribed,” said Mr. Hartwell. “The captain of my mine
tells me that there is excitement as far away as Falmouth and Truro
over the prediction. In some districts no work has been done for several
days. That news I had this morning.”

“'Tis more serious than I thought possible it could be,” said
Wesley. “Our task is not an easy one, but with God's help it shall be
fulfilled.” Going forth through the village in the early afternoon, he
was surprised to find so much evidence of the credence which the people
had given to the prediction and so pronounced a tendency to connect it
with the movement begun by Wesley in the early Summer. It seemed to be
taken for granted that Wesley had come back to urge upon them the need
for immediate repentance. This Pritchard had done with great vehemence
ever since he had prophesied the Great Day.

Wesley found his old friends agitated beyond measure--even those who
had professed to have received the Word that he had preached. No boats
except those owned by Nelly Polwhele's father had put off to the fishing
ground for some days, and, strange to say, although Isaac Polwhele held
that Pritchard had gone too far in all that he had said, he returned on
Friday morning from his night's fishing with a strange story of lights
seen in the depths of the Channel--something like fires seething beneath
the surface--of wonderful disturbances of the waters, although only the
lightest of breezes was hovering round the coast; and of a sudden sound,
thunderous, with the noise as of a cataract tumbling in the distance,
followed by the rolling of large waves in spite of the fact that for the
time there was not a breath stirring the air.

The old fisherman told his story of these things without any reserve;
but while he was still disposed to give a contemptuous nod when anyone
mentioned Pritchard's name, his experience through that night had done
much to widen Pritchard's influence until at last there seemed to be
neither fisherman nor boat-builder that did not dread the dawning of
Monday.

And yet Nelly had not spoken one word about the prophecy when he had
talked with her a few hours before!

This circumstance caused Wesley no little surprise. He asked himself if
Polwhele's girl was the only sensible person in the neighbourhood. While
the other people were overwhelmed at the prospect of a catastrophe on
Monday, she had gone to visit her young ladies and brought back with her
a pair of young doves.

He began to feel that he had never given the girl credit for some of
those qualities which she possessed--qualities which certainly are not
shared by the majority of womankind.

Her father told him before he had reached the village something of the
marvels which had come under his notice only two nights before. But he
tried to make it plain that he did not attach any great importance to
them: he did not regard them as portents, however other people might be
disposed to do so. The old fisherman was shrewd enough to guess that
Mr. Wesley's sympathies were not with Pritchard. Still he could not
deny that what he had seen and heard surpassed all his experience of the
Channel, although he allowed that he had heard of the like from the
lips of mariners who had voyaged far and wide, and had probably
been disbelieved in both hemispheres, by the best judges of what was
credible. He had heard, for instance, of parallels where through long
sultry nights the ocean had seemed one mass of flame. But he himself was
no deep-sea sailor.

“A sea of flame is common enough in some quarters,” said Wesley. “I
myself have seen the Atlantic palpitating like a furnace, and our ship
dashed flakes of fire from the waters that were cloven by her cut-water.
But the sounds which you say you heard--think you not that they came
from a distant thunderstorm?”

“Likely enough, sir, likely enough,” replied the man after a pause; but
he spoke in a way that assured Mr. Wesley that he knew very well that
the sounds had not come from a thunderstorm, however distant. He had had
plenty of experience of thunderstorms, near at hand as well as far off.

“Or Admiral Hawke's ships--might not some of the Admiral's fleet have
come within a mile or two of the coast and discharged their carronades?”
 Wesley suggested.

“Ay, sir, the boom of a ship's gun carries a long way on the water,”
 said the fisherman, but in a tone that suggested graver doubt than
before.

“'Tis clear you are convinced that what you heard was stranger than
either thunder or gunpowder,” said he.

“Nay, sir, what I am thinking of is the sudden uprise of the sea,” said
Polwhele. “Without warning our smack began to sway so that the mast
well-nigh went by the board, albeit there was ne'er a draught o' wind.
And there was summat besides that I kept back from all the world.”

“A greater mystery still?” said Wesley.

“The biggest of all, sir; after the last rumblings my mates thought that
we had been long enough anchored on the fishing bank; so we got in the
grapple and laid out sweeps to pull the smack to the shore.”

He made another pause, and looked into the face of his auditor and then
out seawards. He took a step or two away and stood thoughtfully with
pursed out lips.

“And then?” said Wesley.

“And then, sir, then--sir, the oar blades refused to sink. They struck
on something hard, though not with the hardness of a rock or even a sand
bank. 'Twas like as if they had fallen on a floating dead body--I know
what the feel is, sir. When the _Gloriana_, East Indiaman, went ashore
forty years agone, and broke up on the Teeth--you know the reef, sir--we
were coming on the bodies o' the crew for weeks after, as they came to
the surface, as bodies will after eight days--some say ten, but I stick
to eight.”

“But if you came upon the body of a drowned man the night before last
you would surely have reported it, Polwhele,” said Wesley.

“It were dead bodies that we touched wi' our blades, but they was the
dead bodies of fishes. There they floated, sir, thick as jelly bags
after a Spring tide--hundreds of them--thousands of them--all round the
boats--big and little--mackerel and cod and congers and skates and some
monsters that I had never seen before, with mighty heads. They held the
boat by their numbers, blocking its course till we got up a flare o'
pitch and held it out on an oar and saw what was the matter. That was
how it came about that we landed with fish up to the gunwale, though we
had hauled in empty seines--or well-nigh empty half an hour before.
And if all the other boats had been out that night they would have been
filled likewise. I tell you, sir, all we picked up made no difference
to the shoals that was about us. But I said no word to mortal man about
this event nor e'en to my own wife. What would be the good? I asks you,
sir. The poor folk be troubled enow over Dick Pritchard, as no doubt
you heard. I would that Tuesday was safe o'er us. List, you can hear the
voice o' Simon Barwell baying the boys into the fold like a sheep dog.
Simon was a sad evil liver before he heard you preach, sir, and now he's
telling the lads that they have only another day and half to repent, so
they'd best not put it off too long.”

Wesley looked in the direction he indicated and saw a young fellow
mounted on a fish barrel, haranguing a group of men and women. He was
far off, but his voice every now and again reached the place where
Wesley and the old man stood.

“There be some that holds that Simon himself would ha' done well to
begin his repentance a while back,” resumed Polwhele. “And there's some
others that must needs scamp their penitence, if I have a memory at all;
howsomever, Dick Pritchard----”

“Ah, friend,” said Wesley, “if I could think that the repentance which
is being brought about through fear of Monday will last, I would take
joy to stand by the side of Pritchard and learn from him, but alas, I
fear that when Monday comes and goes----”

“But will it come and go?” cried the old man eagerly.

“I cannot tell--no man living can tell if to-morrow will come and go, or
if he will live to see the day dawn. We know so much, but no more, and I
hold that any man who says that he knows more is tempting the Lord.”

“And I hold with you, Mr. Wesley; only not altogether so fast since
those happenings I have rehearsed to you. What was it slew them fish,
sir?”

“I cannot tell you that. I have heard that some of your mines are
pierced far below the sea, and that for miles out. Perhaps we shall hear
that a store of gunpowder exploded in one of them, throwing off the roof
and killing the fish in the water over it--I do not say that this is the
only explanation of the matter. I make no pretence to account for all
that you saw and heard. I have heard of earthquakes beneath the water.”

“Earthquakes in divers places, Mr. Wesley, 'twas from that text Dick
Pritchard preached last Sunday.” The man's voice was lowered, and there
was something of awe in his whisper. “He prophesied that there would be
an earthquake in divers places--meaning the sea--before the coming of
the terrible day, Monday next. Now you know, sir, why I said naught that
was particular--only hazy like--that none could seize hold upon about
Thursday's fishing. But I've told you, Mr. Wesley, whatever may happen.”

He took off his hat and walked away, when he had looked for some moments
into Wesley's face, and noted the expression that it wore.

And, indeed, Wesley was perturbed as he turned and went up the little
track that led to the summit of the cliffs, and the breezy space that
swept up to the wood. He was greatly perturbed by the plain statement
of the fisherman. He had been anxious to take the most favourable view
of Pritchard and his predictions. He had believed that the man, however
foolish and vain he might be, had been sincere in his conviction that he
was chosen by Heaven to prophesy the approaching end of all things; but
now the impression was forced upon him that the man was on a level with
the soothsayers of heathendom.

Even though he had taken a ludicrously illiterate view of the text,
“There shall be earthquakes in divers places,” he had made it the
subject of another prediction, and it seemed as if this prediction
had actually been realised, although only a single fisherman, and he a
friend of Pritchard's, was in a position to testify to it.

Wesley had heard it said more than once that the finding of water by the
aid of a divining rod was a devil's trick; but he had never taken such a
view of the matter; he affirmed that he would be slow to believe that a
skill which had for its object so excellent an object as the finding of
a spring of the most blessed gift of water, should be attributed to the
Enemy. He preferred to assume that the finding of water was the result
of a certain delicacy of perception on the part of the man with the
hazel wand, just as the detection of a false harmony in music is due to
a refinement of the sense of hearing on the part of other men.

But was he to believe that any man possessed such a sense as enabled him
to predict an earthquake?

It was impossible for him to believe it. And what then was he to think
of the man who had foretold such an event--an event which had actually
taken place within a week of his prediction?

The man could only be a soothsayer. The very fact of his corrupting
the text out of the Sacred Word was a proof of this. If he were in the
service of God, he would never have mistaken the word in the text to
mean the sea. The man was a servant of the Evil One, and Wesley felt
once more that he himself had been to blame in admitting him to his
fellowship, without subjecting him to such tests as would have proved
his faith.

And then he found himself face to face with the further question: If
the man had, by reason of his possession of a certain power, achieved
success in his forecast of one extraordinary event, was it to be assumed
that the other event--the one of supreme importance to the world, and
all that dwell therein--would also take place?

What, was it possible that the Arch Enemy had been able to get
possession of the secret which not even the angels in heaven had
fathomed, and had chosen this man to communicate it to some people in
the world?

What, was it possible that Satan, if he acquired that secret, would
allow it to be revealed, thereby losing his hold upon as many of the
people of the world as became truly repentant, and there was no doubt
that Pritchard had urged repentance upon the people?

It was a tangled web that Wesley found in his hand this day. No matter
which end of it he began to work upon, his difficulties in untangling
seemed the same. He was fearful of doing the man an injustice; but how
could he, as a faithful servant, stand by and see the work with which he
had been entrusted, wrecked and brought to naught?

And then another point suggested itself to him: what if this prediction
became the means of calling many to repentance--true repentance--how
dreadful would be his own condemnation if he were to oppose that which
had been followed by blessing!

It was the flexibility and the ceaseless activity of his mind that
increased the difficulties of his position. He, and he only, could
look at the matter from every standpoint and appreciate it in all its
bearings. If he had not had the refuge of prayer, having faith that he
would receive the Divine guidance, he would have allowed the vanity--if
it was vanity--of Pritchard to be counteracted in the ordinary--in what
seemed to be the natural way--namely, by the ridicule which would follow
the nonfulfilment of his prophecy.

He prayed.




CHAPTER XV

He had seated himself on the trunk of a fallen tree on the edge of the
wood, and he had a feeling that he was not alone. The Summer ever seemed
to him to be a spiritual essence--a beautiful creature of airy flashing
draperies, diffusing perfumes a& she went by. He had known the joy of
her companionship for several years, for no man had ampler opportunities
of becoming acquainted with the seasons in all their phases.

There was the sound of abundance of life in the woods behind him, and
around the boles of the scattered trees in front of him the graceful
little stoats were playing. At his feet were scattered all the wild
flowers of the meadow. Where the earth was brown under the trees,
myriads of fairy bells were hanging in clusters, and in the meadow the
yellow buttercups shone like spangles upon a garment of green velvet.
He was not close enough to the brink of the cliffs to be able to see
the purple and blue and pink of the flowers scattered among the coarse
herbage of the rocks. But the bank of gorse that flowed like a yellow
river through the meadow could not be ignored. In the sunlight it was a
glory to see.

The sky was faintly grey, but the sea was of the brightest azure--the
pure translucent blue of the sapphire, and it was alive with the light
that seemed to burn subtly within the heart of a great jewel. But in the
utter distance it became grey until it mingled imperceptibly with the
sky.

The poet-preacher saw everything that there was to be seen, and his
faith was upheld as it ever was, by the gracious companionship of
nature, and he cried now:

“Oh, that a man could speak to men in the language of the Summer!”

Why could not all eyes of men look forth over that sea to where the
heaven bowed down and mingled with it? Why could not men learn what was
meant by this symbol of the mystic marriage of heaven and earth? Why
should they continue to refuse the love which was offered them from
above?

Everything that he saw was a symbol to him of the love of which he
was the herald--the love which is followed by a peace that passeth all
understanding. He was conscious of this peace leaning over him with
outstretched wings, and he felt that the answer to his prayer had come.
He would make no further attempt to solve the difficulties which had
perplexed him. The voice that breathed the message that soothed him was
the same that Elijah heard, and it said:

“Rest in the Lord, and He shall direct thy ways.”

He remained there for another hour, and then rose and made his way
slowly toward the village.

The meadow track led to a broad gap in the hedge of gorse, and just
as he had passed through, he was aware of the quick pattering of a
galloping horse on the short grass behind him, and before he had time to
turn, the horseman had put his mount to the hedge, making a clear jump
of it.

“What, ho!” cried the man, apparently recognising Wesley before the
horse's feet had reached the ground. “What, ho!” and he pulled the
animal to its haunches.

Wesley saw that he was Parson Rodney, the good-humoured Rector who had
spoken to him when he had been on the road with Nelly six weeks before.

“Ho, Mr. Wesley, I had heard that you were returning to us,” he cried.
“Is it your thought that at Monday's Assize you will run a better chance
if you are found in good company? What, sir, never shake your head in so
gloomy a fashion. The Prophet Pritchard may be wrong. I was thinking of
him when I came upon a clump of guzzlers reeling along the road an hour
ago--reeling along with the buttercups as yellow as gold under their
feet, and the sunlight bringing out all the scents of the earth that we
love so well--I thought what a pity 'twould be if the world should come
to an end when all her creatures are so happy!”

“Pardon me, Reverend sir,” said Wesley. “But I have at heart too much
sorrow to enjoy any jest, least of all one made upon a matter that seems
to me far too solemn for jesting.”

“Pshaw! Mr. Wesley, what is there serious or solemn in the vapourings of
a jackanapes?” cried the other. “What doth a parson of our church--and
a learned parson into the bargain--a Fellow of his College--not a dunce
like me--what, I say, doth such an one with the maunderings of a vain
and unlettered bumpkin whom his very godfathers and godmothers made
a mark for ridicule when they had him christened Richard--Richard
Pritchard?”

“Ah, sir,” said Wesley, “you witnessed what you did an hour ago on the
roadside--you saw what I saw, and yet you can ask me why I should be
troubled. Were not you troubled, Mr. Rodney?”

“Troubled? Oh, ay; my horse became uneasy when one of the drunken
rascals yelled out a ribald word or two across the hedge--I am very
careful of my horse's morals, sir; I never let him hear any bad
language. When we are out with the hounds I throw my kerchief over his
ears when we chance to be nigh the Master or his huntsmen. That is why I
laid over the rascal's shoulders with my crop, though the hedge saved
them from much that I intended. Trust me, Mr. Wesley, that is the way
such fellows should be treated, and as for this Pritchard--faugh! a
horsewhip on his back would bring him to his senses, though as a Justice
of the Peace, I would be disposed to let this precious water-finder find
what the nature of a horse-pond is like. Why, in Heaven's name, do you
trouble yourself about him?”

“It was I who gave him countenance at first, sir. He made profession to
me and I trusted him. I fear that the work on behalf of which I am very
jealous may suffer through his indiscretion.”

“His indiscretion? _your_ indiscretion, you surely mean, Mr. Wesley.”

“I accept your correction, sir.”

“Look ye here, Mr. Wesley, I have more respect for you, sir, than I have
for any man of our cloth--ay, even though he may wear an apron and lawn
sleeves. I know that as a clergyman I am not fit to black your shoes,
but I am equally sure that as a man of the world, with a good working
knowledge of human nature, I am beyond you; and that is why I tell you
that this movement of yours has--well, it has too much movement in it to
prove a lasting thing. You have never ridden to hounds or you would know
that 'tis slow and steady that does it. If you keep up the pace from the
start, you will be blown before the first half-hour is over, and where
will you be when you have a double ditch to hop over? Why, you'll be up
to your neck in the mire of the first. Mr. Wesley, there are a good
many ditches to be got over in the life of a beneficed clergyman of your
Church and mine; and, my word for it, you would do well to take them
slowly, and reserve your strength. You want to go too fast ahead--to
rush your hedges--that's how the thorns in the flesh thrive, and this
Pritchard is only one of the many thorns that will make your life
wearisome to you, and bring your movement to an end. You have never said
a hard word about me, Mr. Wesley, though you had good reason to do so;
and I have never said aught but what is good about you.”

“I know it, sir. Others have called me a busybody--some a charlatan.”

“They were fools. You are the most admirable thing in the world, sir--a
zealous parson; but a thoroughbred horse is not the best for daily use;
a little blood is excellent, but not too much. Your zeal will wear you
out--ay, and it will wear your listeners out sooner. You cannot expect
to lead a perpetual revival, as people call it, and that's why I am
convinced that the humdrum system, with a stout woollen petticoat here
and a bottle of sound port there, is the best for the parsons and the
best for the people.”

“Your views are shrewd, and I dare not at this moment say that they are
not justifiable. But for myself--sir, if God gives me strength, I shall
not slacken the work with which I believe He hath entrusted me--until
our churches are filled with men and women eager in their search after
the Truth.”

“If all your friends were like you, the thing might be accomplished,
Mr. Wesley; but the breakdown of your methods--your Methodism--will come
through your introduction of the laity as your chief workers. You will
find yourself face to face with Pritchards, and the last state of the
people will be, as it is now, worse than the first. You may have
done some good since you came here to preach a month ago, but you
have--unwittingly, I say--done great mischief. My parishioners were
heretofore living quite comfortably, they were satisfied with my
ministrations, such as they were. I have heard it said that a healthy
man does not know that he has any liver or spleen or vitals within his
body: 'tis only the sick that have that knowledge. Well, the same is true
in respect to their souls. Sir, there was not a man of my flock that
knew he had a soul. There was a healthy condition of things for you!”

“Sir, I entreat of you not to mock!”

“I am not mocking, friend Wesley. What have people in the state of life
to which the majority of my parishioners have been called, to do with
the state of their souls? There should be a law that no man below the
Game Law qualification shall assume that he has a soul.”

“I cannot listen further to you, Mr. Rodney.”

“Nay, Mr. Wesley, whatever you be, I'll swear that you are no coward:
you will not run away by reason of not agreeing with an honest
opponent--and I am not an opponent--I am only an honest friend. I say
that my people were simple, homely people who respected me because I
never wittingly awoke a man or woman who went asleep in my church, and
because I never bothered them with long sermons, when they could hear
their Sunday dinners frizzling in their cottages--they respected me for
that, but more because they knew I had a sound knowledge of a horse, a
boat, a dog and a game-cock.”

“Mr. Rodney----”

“Pshaw, Wesley, have you not eyes to see that the Church of England
exists more for the bodies than the souls of the people? I would rather
see a good, sturdy lot of Englishmen in England--good drinkers of honest
ale, breeders of good fat cattle, and growers of golden wheat--honest,
hard swearers of honest English oaths, and with selfrespect enough
to respect their betters--I would rather have them such, I say, than
snivelling, ranting Nonconformists, prating about their souls and
showing the whites of their eyes when they hear that an educated man,
who is a gentleman first and a parson afterwards, follows the hounds,
relishes a main in the cockpit, and a rubber of whist in the rectory
parlour and preaches the gospel of fair play for ten minutes in his
pulpit, and the rest of the twenty-four hours out of it.”

“And I, Mr. Rodney, would rather hear of the saving of a sinner's soul
by a Nonconformist ranter, Churchman though I be, than see the whole
nation living in comfortable forgetfulness of God.”

Parson Rodney laughed.

“I will give you another year of riding to and fro and telling the
peasantry that they have souls,” he said. “You will not make us a nation
of spiritual hypochondriacs, Mr. Wesley. For a while people will fancy
that there is something the matter with them, and you'll hear a deal of
groaning and moaning at your services; but when the novelty of the thing
is gone, they will cease to talk of their complaints. Englishmen are
stronger in their bodies than in their souls, and the weaker element
will go to the wall, and your legs will be crushed against that same
wall by the asses you are riding. Why, already I know that you have
suffered a bruise or two, through the shambling of that ass whose name
is Pritchard. The unprofitable prophet Pritchard. A prophet? Well, 'tis
not the first time that an ass thought himself a prophet, and began to
talk insolently to his master. But Balaam's animal was a hand or two
higher than his brother Pritchard; when he began to talk he proved
himself no ass, but the moment the other opens his mouth, he stands
condemned. Lay on him with your staff, Mr. Wesley; he has sought to make
a fool of you without the excuse that there is an angel in your way. I
have half a mind to give his hide a trouncing myself to-morrow, only I
could not do so without giving a cut at you, who are, just now, holding
on by his tail, hoping to hold him back in his fallow, and, believe me,
sir, I respect you with all my heart, and envy your zeal. Good-day to
you, Mr. Wesley; I hope I may live to see you in good living yet; if
you worry to a sufficient degree the powers that be, they will assuredly
make you a Dean, hoping that in a Cathedral Close, where everything
slumbers, you will fold your hands and sleep comfortably like the rest.
I doubt if you would, sir. But meantime if you will come to my humble
rectory this evening, I can promise you a Tubber with a good partner,
and a bottle of Bordeaux that the King of France might envy, but that
has paid no duty to the King of England.”

“I thank you for your invitation, sir; but you know that I cannot accept
it.”

“I feared as much, sir. But never mind, I hope that I shall live
until you are compelled to accept my offer of hospitality to you as my
Bishop.”

He waved his hand, and gave his horse, who had never heard his master
talk for so long a time at a stretch and whose impatience had for some
time given way to astonishment, a touch with the spur. Wesley watched
him make a beautiful jump over the gate that led into the park, beyond
which the rectory nestled on the side of a hill among its orchards.

He turned with a sigh to the cliff path leading beyond the village to
where Mr. Hartwell's house stood, separated from the beach only by a
wall of crags, and a few rows of weather-beaten trees, all stretching
rather emaciated arms inland.




CHAPTER XVI

Wesley had preached under varying conditions in different parts of
England, but never under such as prevailed on this Sunday, when he set
out in the early morning with his friend, Mr. Hartwell, for the pulpit
among the crags which he had occupied several times during his previous
stay at Porthawn.

When he set out from the Hartwells' house the grey sea-mist, which had
been rolling round the coast and through the valley of the Lana for
several days past, was as thick as a fog. It was dense and confusing
to one who faced it for the first time. It was so finely grey that one
seemed to see through it at first, and boldly plunged into its depths;
but the instant that one did so, its folds closed over one as the dense
waters of the sea do over a diver, and one was lost. Before one had
recovered, one had the feeling of being smothered in a billow of grey
gauze, smooth as silk that has been dipped in milk, and gasped within
the windings of its folds. It was chilly, with the taste of the salt sea
in its moisture. It took the heart out of one.

“This is nothing, sir,” said Mr. Hartwell. “Lay your hand upon my arm
and you will have no trouble: I could find my way along our cliffs
through the thickest weather. I have been put to the test before now.”

“I am not thinking so much of ourselves as of our friends whom we expect
to meet us in the valley,” said Wesley. “How, think you, will they be
able to find their way under such conditions?”

“I do not assume that this mist is more than a temporary thing--it comes
from the sea well-nigh every Summer morn, but perishes as it rolls over
the cliffs,” said Mr. Hartwell.

“It was clinging to the ridges of the valley slopes when I rode through,
almost at noon yesterday,” said Wesley.

“Stragglers from the general army that we have to encounter here,” said
the other. “When the phalanx of sea-mist rolls inland, it leaves its
tattered remnants of camp followers straggling in its wake. I believe
that when we reach the place we shall find ourselves bathed in
sunshine.”

“May your surmise prove correct!” said Wesley.

And so they started breaking into the mist, feeling its salt touch upon
their faces and hearing the sound of the waves breaking on the beach
below them. It was curiously hollow, and every now and then amid the
noise of the nearer waves, there came the deep boom from the distant
caves, and the sob of the waters that were choked in the narrow passage
between the cliffs and the shoreward limits of the Dog's Teeth.

They had not gone more than half a mile along the track that led to the
pack horse road, when they heard the sound of voices, near at hand, with
a faint and still fainter far-off hail. The next moment they almost ran
into a mixed party of travellers on the same track.

Mr. Hartwell was acquainted with some of them. They came from a hamlet
high up in the valley a mile from Ruthallion.

“We are bound for the preaching,” said one of them. “What a wandering
we have had for the past two hours! We lost our way twice and only
recovered ourselves when we gained the horse road.”

“We are going to the preaching also,” said Mr. Hartwell.

“How then does it come that we meet you instead of overtaking you?”
 asked the other.

There was a silence. The halloa in the distance became fainter.

“One of us must be wrong,” said Wesley.

“We don't match our knowledge against Mr. Hartwell's,” said the
spokesman of the strangers.

“I am confident that I know the way,” said Mr. Hartwell. “I only left
the main track once, and that was to cut off the round at Stepney's
Gap.”

“On we go then, with blessings on your head, sir,” said the other man.
“Friends, where should we ha' landed ourselves if we had fallen short of
our luck in coming right on Mr. Hartwell? Would we not do kindly to give
a halloa or twain to help those poor hearts that may be wandering wild?”
 he added, pointing in the direction whence the hail seemed to come.

“Ay, 'twould be but kind,” said an old man of the party. “Oh, 'tis a dread
and grisly mishap to be wandering wild in an unknown country.”

Forthwith the younger ones sent out answering hails to the halloas that
came to them. But when the next sounds reached their ears like echoes of
their own shouts, it seemed that they came from quite another quarter.

“I could ha' taken my davy that the lost ones was off another point o'
the compass,” said the old man.

“No, Comyn,” said another. “No, my man, they came from thither.”

He pointed straight in front of him.

“From where we stand that should be the Gap,” said Mr. Hartwell.

“A special comfortable place to be wandering wild in is the Gap, for if
you walk straight on it carries you to the mighty ocean, and if you walk
back you will reach your own home safe, if it be in that direction,”
 said the old man with emphasis.

“Was this mist far up the valley?” Wesley enquired.

“Not more than a league, sir,” replied the old man. “'Twas a sunlit morn
when we made our start, and then it came down on us like a ship in full
sail. There goes another hail, and, as I said, it comes from behind
us. Is there one of us that has a clear throat. 'Kish Trevanna, you was
a gallery choir singer in your youth, have you any sound metallic notes
left that you could cheer up the lost ones withal? Come, goodman, be not
over shy. Is this a time to be genteel when a parson's of the company,
waiting to help and succour the vague wanderers?”

“The call is for thee, Loveday, for didst not follow the hounds oft
when there was brisk work in Squire's coverts?” said the man to whom the
appeal was made.

“We must hasten onward,” said Mr. Hartwell, making a start. “'Tis most
like that we are overtaking whomsoever it be that was shouting a hail.
Forward, friends, and feel your way to the pack-horse road.”

The whole party began to move, Mr. Hartwell and Wesley leading, and
before they had proceeded for more than two hundred yards they heard the
sound of talking just ahead of them, and the next moment a group of men
loomed through the mist. Friends were also in the new party.

“Were you them that sang out?” asked one of them.

“Only in answer to your hail; we be no cravens, but always ready to help
poor wanderers,” replied the talkative old man.

“We did not sound a note before we heard a hail,” said the questioner in
the new party. “We have not strayed yet, being bound for the preaching.”

“Have you been on the horse road?” asked Hartwell.

“The horse road? Why, sir, the horse road lies down the way that you
came,” said the other.

“Surely not, my friend. How could we have missed it?” said Hartwell.

“If 'twasn't for the fog I could walk as steady for it as a mule,” said
the old man. “Ay, friends, us any mule under a pack saddle, for I have
traversed valley and cleft an hundred times in the old days, being well
known as a wild youth, asking your pardon for talking so secular when a
parson is by. I am loath to boast, but there was never a wilder youth in
three parishes, Captain Hartwell.”

(Mr. Hartwell had once been the captain of a mine.)

“Surely we should be guided by the sound of the sea,” said Wesley. “A
brief while ago I heard the boom of waters into one of the caves. If we
listen closely we should learn if the sound is more distinct and thereby
gather if we are approaching that part of the cliff or receding from
it.”

“Book-learning is a great help at times, but 'tis a snare in a streaming
fog, or in such times of snow as we were wont to have in the hard years
before the Queen died in her gorgeous palace,” remarked the patriarch.

“One at a time, grandfather,” said a man who had arrived with the last
party. “There's not space enough for you and the ocean on a morn like
this. Hark to the sea.”

They stood together listening, but now, through one of the mysteries of
a fog, not a sound from the sea reached them. They might have been miles
inland.

“I have been baffled by a fog before now,” said a shepherd. “Have
followed the bleat of an ewe for a mile over the hills, and lo, the
silly beast had never left her lamb, and when I was just over her she
sounded the faintest.”

“Time is passing; should we not make a move in some direction?” said
Wesley. “Surely, my friends, we must shortly come upon some landmark
that will tell us our position in a moment.”

“I cannot believe that in trying to cut off the mile for the Gap I went
grossly astray,” said Mr. Hartwell. “I am for marching straight on.”

“Straight on we march and leave the guidance to Heaven,” said Wesley.

On they went, Wesley marvelling how it was that men who should have
known every inch of the way blindfold, having been on it almost daily
all their lives, could be so baffled by a mist. To be sure Mr. Hartwell
had forsaken the track at one place, but was it likely that he had got
upon a different one when he had made his detour to cut off a mile of
their journey.

On they walked, however, their party numbering fourteen men, and then
all of a sudden the voice of the sea came upon them, and at the same
moment they almost stepped over the steep brink of a little chasm.

“What is this?” cried Hartwell. “As I live'tis Gosney hollow, and we are
scarcely half a mile from my house! We have walked a good mile back on
our steps.”

“Did not I tell you how I followed the ewe?” said the shepherd. “'Tis
for all the world the same tale. Sore baffling thing is a sea-mist.”

“The valley will be full o' lost men and women this day,” remarked the
old man.

There is no condition of life so favourable to the growth of despondency
as that which prevails in a fog. The most sanguine are filled with
despair when they find that their own senses, to which they have trusted
for guidance and protection, are defeated. The wanderers on this Sunday
morning stood draped by the fog, feeling a sense of defeat. No one made
a suggestion. Everyone seemed to feel that it would be useless to make
the attempt to proceed to the crags where the preaching was to be held.

“Think you, Mr. Wesley, that this state of weather is the work of
the Fiend himself?” asked the talkative old man. “I know 'tis a busy
question with professing Christians, as well as honest Churchmen--this
one that pertains to the weather. Stands to reason, for say I have a
turnip crop coming on and so holds out for a wet month or two, while a
neighbour may look for sunshine to ripen his grain. Now if so be that
the days are shiny my turnips get the rot, and who is to blame a weak
man for saying that the Foul Fiend had a hand in prolonging the shine;
but what saith my neighbour?”

“Hither comes another covey of wandering partridges,” said one of the
first party, as the sound of voices near at hand was heard.

“Now, for myself, I hold that 'tis scriptural natural to say that aught
in the matter that pertains to the smoke of the Pit is the Devil's own
work, and if such a fog as this comes not straight out the main flue
of----”

The old man's fluency was interrupted by the arrival of the new party,
Nelly Polwhele and her father.

“You are just setting out for the preaching, I suppose; so we are not
so late as we feared,” cried the girl. “Still, though we shall certainly
not be late for the preaching, however far behind we may be, we would do
well to haste.”

Wesley surely felt less despondent at the cheery greeting of the girl.
He laughed, saying:

“'Tis all very well to cry 'Haste,' child; know that it Has taken us a
whole hour to get so far.”

“Is't possible that you have been out for an hour, sir?” she cried.
“Surely some man of you was provident to carry with him a compass on
such a morn as this?”

“You speak too fast, maid; book-learning has made thee talkative; a
mariner's compass is for the mariners--it will not work on dry land,”
 said the old man.

“Mine is one of the sort that was discovered since your sensible days,
friend--ay, as long agone as that; it works on land as well as on sea.
If a bumpkin stands i' the north its finger will point dead to him.
Wouldst like to test it thyself?” said Nelly's father. Before the old
man had quite grasped his sarcasm, though it was scarcely wanting in
breadth, he had turned to Mr. Hartwell, displaying a boat's compass in
its wooden box.

“'Twas Nelly bade me carry it with us,” he Said. “I worked out all the
bearings o' the locality before we started, and I can make the Red Tor
as easy as I could steer to any unseen place on the lonely ocean. Here
we be, sir; west sou'west to the Gap, track or no track; then west
and by nor'-west a little northerly to the lift o' the cliff, thence
south-half-east to the Red Tor. Up wi' your grapples, friends, we'll be
there before the sermon has begun or even sooner if we step out.”

Wesley, and indeed all of the party except perhaps the pessimistic old
man, whose garrulity had suffered a check, felt more cheerful. Hartwell
clapped Polwhele on the back, saying:

“You are the man we were waiting for. Onward, pilot; we shall reach the
Tor in good time, despite our false start and the delay it made to us.”
 They started along the track, Polwhele at their head, and Wesley with
Mr. Hartwell and Nelly immediately behind him.

“There's a whole sermon in this, child,” said the preacher.

“A whole sermon, sir?” said she.

“There should be only one sermon preached by man to men, and this
is it,” said Wesley. “The poor wandering ones standing on a narrow
causeway, with danger on every side, and the grey mist of doubt in
the air. The sense of being lost--mark that, dear child,--and then the
coming of the good Pilot, and a complete faith in following Him into
the place of safety which we all seek. There is no sermon worth the
preaching save only this.” On they went, Polwhele calling out the
bearings every now and again, and as they proceeded they came upon
several other travellers, more or less forlorn--all were hoping to reach
the Red Tor in time; so that before the abrupt turn was made from the
pack-horse track, there was quite a little procession on the way.

Never had Wesley had such an experience as this.

Out from the folds of the impenetrable mist that rolled through the
hollows of the low mounds that formed that natural amphitheatre, came
the sound of many voices, and the effect was strange, for one could not
even see that a mass of people was assembled there. The hum that the
newcomers heard when still some distance away became louder as
they approached, and soon they were able to distinguish words and
phrases--men calling aloud to men--some who had strayed from the friends
were moving about calling their names, and occasionally singing out a
hail in the forlorn hope of their voices being recognised; then there
came the distressed wail of a woman who had got separated from her
party, and with the laughter of a group who had got reunited after many
wanderings. There was no lack of sounds, but no shape of men or women
could be distinguished in the mist, until Wesley and his party were
among them. And even then the dimly seen shapes had suggestions of the
unreal about them. Some would loom larger than human for a few moments,
and then vanish suddenly. Others seemed grotesquely transfigured in the
mist as if they had enwrapped themselves in a disguise of sackcloth.
They seemed not to be flesh and blood, but only shadows. Coming suddenly
upon them, one felt that one had wandered to another world--a region of
restless shadows.

How was any man to preach to such a congregation? How was a preacher to
put force into his words, when failing to see the people before him?

When Wesley found himself on the eminence where he had spoken to the
multitude on his first coming to Cornwall, and several times later, he
looked down in front of him and saw nothing except the fine gauze of the
grey clouds that rolled around the rocks. He stood there feeling that he
was the only living being in a world that was strange to him. He thought
of the poet who had gone to the place of departed spirits, and realised
his awful isolation. How was he to speak words of life to this spectral
host?

He had never known what fear was even when he had faced a maddened crowd
bent upon the most strenuous opposition to his preaching: he had simply
paid no attention to them, and the sound of his voice had held them
back from him and their opposition had become parched. But now he felt
something akin to terror. Who was he that he should make this attempt to
do what no man had ever done before?

He fell upon his knees and prayed aloud. Light--Light--Light--that was
the subject of his prayer. He was there with the people who had walked
in darkness--he had walked with them, and now they were in the presence
of the One who had said “Let there be Light.” He prayed that the Light
of the World might appear to them at that time--the Light that shineth
through the darkness that comprehended Him not. He prayed for light to
understand the Light, as the poet had done out of the darkness of his
blindness.

               “So much the rather, Thou Celestial Light,

               Shine inward and the mind through her way

               Irradiate; there plant eyes; all mists from thence

               Purge and disperse that I may see and tell

               Of things invisible to mortal sight.”

And after his prayer with closed eyes, he began to preach into that
void, and his text was of the Light also. His voice sounded strange to
his own ears.

It seemed to him that he was standing in front of a wall, trying to make
his words pass through it. This was at first; a moment later he felt
that he was speaking to a denser multitude than he had ever addressed
before. The mist was before his eyes as a sea of sad grey faces waiting,
earnest and anxious for the message of gladness which he was bringing
them. His voice rose to heights of impressiveness that it had never
reached before. It clove a passage through the mist and fell upon the
ears of the multitude whom he could not see, stirring them as they had
never been stirred before, while he gave them his message of the Light.

For close upon half an hour he spoke of the Light. He repeated the
word--again and again he repeated it, and every time that it came from
his lips it had the effect of a lightning flash. This was at first. He
spoke in flashes of lightning, uttered from the midst of the cloud of a
night of dense blackness; and then he made a change. The storm that
made fitful, fiercer illumination passed away, and after an interval
the reiteration of the Light appeared again. But now it was the true
Light--the light of dawn breaking over a sleeping world. It did not come
in a flash to dazzle the eyes and then to make the darkness more dread;
it moved gradually upward; there was a flutter as of a dove's wing over
the distant hills, the tender feathers of the dawn floated through the
air, and fell upon the Eastern Sea, quivering there; and even while one
watched them wondering, out of the tremulous spaces of the sky a
silver, silken thread was spread where the heaven and the waters met--it
broadened and became a cincture of pearls, and then the thread that
bound it broke, and the pearls were scattered, flying up to the sky and
falling over all the waters in beautiful confusion; and before the world
had quite awakened, the Day itself gave signs of hastening to gather up
the pearls of Dawn. The Day's gold-sandalled feet were nigh--they were
shining on the sea's brim, and lo! the East was bright with gold. Men
cried, “Why do those feet tarry?” But even while they spoke, the wonder
of the Morn had come upon them. Flinging down his mantle upon the
mountains over which he had stepped--a drapery of translucent lawn, the
splendour of the new light sprung upward, lifting hands of blessing over
the world, and men looked and saw each other's faces, and knew that they
were blest.

And the wonder that he spoke of had come to pass. While the preacher had
been describing the breaking light, the light had come. All unnoticed,
the mist had been dissolving, and when he had spoken his last words the
sunlight was bathing the preacher and the multitude who hung upon his
words. The wonder that he told them of had taken place, and there did
not seem to them anything of wonder about it. Only when he made his
pause did they look into each other's faces as men do when they have
slept and the day has awakened them. Then with the sunlight about them,
for them to drink great draughts that refreshed their souls, he spoke of
the Light of the World--of the Dayspring from on High that had visited
the world, and their souls were refreshed.

And not one word had he said of all that he had meant to say--not one
word of the man whom he had come so far to reprove.

No one was conscious of the omission.




CHAPTER XVII

The day became sultry when the mist had cleared away, and by noon the
heat was more oppressive than had been known all the Summer. Wesley
was exhausted by the time he set out with Mr. Hartwell to return to the
village. They needed no mariner's compass now to tell them the way.

They scarcely exchanged a word. They seemed to have forgotten the
conditions under which they had gone forth in the early morning. A new
world seemed to have been created since then--a world upon which the
shadow of darkness could not fall for evermore.

They had gone straight to the cliffs, hoping for a breath of air
from the sea to refresh them; but they were disappointed; the air
was motionless and the reflection of the sunlight from the waves was
dazzling in its brilliancy.

“I should have thought that the very weight of this heavy atmosphere
would make the sea like glass,” said Wesley, while they rested on the
summit of the cliff. “And yet there are waves such as I have never
seen on this part of the coast unless when something akin to a gale was
blowing.”

“I daresay there was a strong breeze blowing, though we did not feel it
in the shelter of the hollow of the Tor,” said his companion.

“True; it would require a strong wind to sweep away the mist so
suddenly,” said Wesley.

“Ah, sir,” said the other, “I did not think of a wind in that
connection. Was it the fingers of the wind, think you, that swept that
thick veil aside, or was it the Hand that rent in twain the veil of the
Temple?”

“I am reproached, brother,” said Wesley. “Let us give thanks unto God.
May He give us grace to think of all things as coming from Him--whether
they take the form of a mist which obscures His purpose, or the darkness
of a tempest on which He rides. I know myself wanting in faith at all
times--in that faith without reserve which a child has in his father. I
confess that for a moment in the morning I had the same thought as that
which was expressed by the old man who joined us: I thought it possible
that that fog which threatened to frustrate our walk had been sent by
the Enemy. Should I have thought so if our work had been hindered in
very truth? I dare not say no to that question. But now I know that it
helped rather than obstructed, us.”

“There can be no doubt about that,” said Hartwell. “For myself, I say
that I was never so deeply impressed in my life as at that moment when
I found myself looking at you; you were speaking of the world awakening,
and it seemed to me that I had been asleep--listening to the sound of
your voice--the voice of a dream, and then I was full awake, I knew not
how. I tell you, Mr. Wesley, I was not conscious of the change that was
taking place--from darkness to light.”

“Nor was I,” said Wesley. “My eyes were closed fast while I was
preaching. I had closed them to shut out that incongruous picture of
obscurity, while I thought of the picture of the breaking of light;
when I opened my eyes the picture that I had been striving to paint was
before me. It was the Lord's doing.”

While they remained resting on the cliff the officer of the Preventive
men came upon them. He knew Hartwell, and had, when Wesley had been
in the neighbourhood before, thanked him for the good influence his
preaching had in checking the smuggling.

He now greeted them cordially and enquired if they had come from the
village, adding that he hoped the fishing boats had not suffered from
the effects of the tide.

“We left the port early in the morning, and in the face of the mist.
What is the matter with the tide?” said Hartwell.

“You have not been on the beach? Why, 'tis a marvel, gentlemen,” cried
the officer. “The like has not been seen since I took up my appointment
in this neighbourhood--a tide so high that the caves are flooded to the
roof. List, sirs; you can hear naught of the usual boom of the waters
when the pressed air forces them back.”

They listened, but although there was the usual noise of the waves
breaking along the coast, the boom from the caves which had been heard
at intervals through the mist was now silent.

“As a rule 'tis at high tide that the sound is loudest,” said Hartwell.

“That is so,” said the officer. “The higher the water is, the more the
air in the caves becomes pressed, and so the louder is the explosion.
But this day the water has filled the caves to the roof, leaving no air
in their depths to bellow. One of my men, on his patrol an hour ago, was
overtaken by the tide at the foot of the cliffs at a place high above
spring tide mark. He had to climb to safety. He did so only with
difficulty. Had he been at Nitlisaye, nothing would have saved him.”

“What, are Nithsaye sands flooded? Impossible,” cried Hartwell.

“Flooded up to Tor, sir. I tell you the thing is a marvel!”

“All the more so, since there is no wind to add to the force of the
tide,” said Wesley.

“True, sir; there was a strong breeze in the early morning that swept
the sea-mist over the shore; but there has not been a capful since,”
 said the officer.

“But see the waves! Are they the effects of the early wind, think you,
sir?” asked Wesley.

“Maybe; but if so, this also is past my experience of this coast, sir,”
 replied the man. “But I allow that when I was sailing with Captain
Hawke in the West Indies I knew of the waters of the Caribbean Sea being
stirred up like this in the dead calm before a hurricane that sent us on
our beam ends, and one of our squadron on to the Palisades Reef at Port
Royal.”

“Do you fear for a hurricane at this time?” asked Wesley.

“A gale, maybe; but no such hurricane as wrecks the island it swoops
down on in the Leewards, sir. Oh, a hurricane in very deed! Our ship's
cutter--a thirty-foot boat swung in on the iron davits--and lashed down
to iron stanchions on the deck--was whisked adrift as if it had been an
autumn leaf. I say it went five hundred fathom through the air and no
man saw it fall. I saw a road twenty foot wide shorn through the dense
forest for five miles as clean as with a scythe, as you go to Spanish
Town--a round dozen of planters' houses and a stone church had once
stood on that cutting. They were swept off, and not a stone of any one
of them was ever found by mortal after. Oh, a hurricane, indeed! We need
expect naught like that, by the mercy of Heaven, gentlemen; though I
care not for the look of yon sun.”

They glanced upwards. The sun had the aspect of being seen through a
slight haze, which made it seem of a brazen red, large and with its
orb all undefined. It looked more like the red fire of a huge lighted
brazier than the round sun, and all around it there was the gleam as of
moving flames.

“Looks unhealthy--is't not so?” said the officer.

“There is a haze in the air; but the heat is none the less,” said
Hartwell.

“I like it not, sirs. This aspect of the sun is part and parcel of some
disturbance of nature that we would do well to be prepared for,” said
the officer, shaking his head ominously.

“A disturbance of nature? What mean you? Have you been hearing of the
fishing-boats that have been hauled up on the stones at the port for the
past two days? Have you taken serious account of the foolishness of a
man who calls himself a prophet?” asked Hartwell.

The officer laughed.

“Oh, I have heard much talk of the Prophet Pritchard,” he said. “But you
surely do not reckon me as one of those poor wretches whom he has
scared out of their lives by threatening them with the Day of Judgment
to-morrow? Nay, sir; I placed my trust in a statement that begins with
soundings, the direction of the wind and its force, the sail that is
set, the last cast of the log, the bearings of certain landmarks,
and the course that is being steered. My word for it, without such a
preface, any statement is open to doubt.”

“And have you received such a statement in regard to your 'disturbance
of nature,' sir?”

“That I have, sirs. Our cutter was cruising about a league off shore
two nights ago, light breeze from west-nor'-west, sail set; mainsail,
foresail, jib, speed three knots. Hour, two bells in the morning, Master
in charge on deck, watch, larboard--names if necessary. Reports, night
sultry, cloudless since second dog watch, attention called to sounds as
of discharge of great guns in nor'-nor'west. Lasted some minutes, not
continuous; followed by noise as of a huge wave breaking, or the fall
of a cataract in same quarter. Took in jib, mainsail haul, stand by to
lower gaff. No further sounds reported, but sea suddenly got up, though
no change of wind, force or direction, and till four bells cutter sailed
through waves choppy as if half a gale had been blowing. After four
bells gradual calm. Nothing further to report till eight bells, when
cutter, tacking east-nor'east, all sail set, gunner's mate found in it
a dead fish. Master reports quantity of dead fish floating around.
Took five aboard--namely, hake two, rock codling one, turbot two,
rock codling with tail damaged. That's a statement we can trust, Mr.
Hartwell. Yesterday it was supplemented by accounts brought by my men
of the coast patrol, of quantities of dead fish washed ashore in various
directions. And now comes this marvellous tide. Sirs, have not I some
grounds for touching upon such a subject as 'a great disturbance of
nature'?”

“Ample, sir, ample,” said Wesley. “Pray, does your West Indian
experience justify you in coming to any conclusion in regard to these
things?”

“I have heard of fish being killed by the action of a volcano beneath
the sea,” said the officer. “I have heard it said that all the Leeward
Islands are volcanos, though only one was firing broadsides the year
that I was with my Lord Hawke. 'Twas at Martinique which we took from
the French. Even before the island came in sight, our sails were black
with dust and our decks were strewn with cinders. But when we drew nigh
to the island and saw the outburst of molten rocks flying up to the very
sky itself--sir, I say to you that when a man has seen such a sight as
that, he is not disposed to shudder at all that a foolish fellow who has
never sailed further than the Bristol Channel may prate about the Day of
Judgment.”

“And to your thinking, sir, an earthquake or some such convulsion of
nature hath taken place at the bottom of our peaceful Channel?” said
Wesley.

“In my thinking, sir, yes. But I would not say that the convulsion was
at the bottom of the Channel; it may have been an hundred leagues in
the Atlantic. And more is to come, sirs; take my word for it, more is to
come. Look at yonder sun; 'tis more ominous than ever. I shall look out
for volcano dust in the next rain, and advise the near-, est station
east'ard to warn all the fishing craft to make snug, and be ready for
the worst. I should not be surprised to find that the tide is still
rising, and so I wish you good-morning, sirs.”

He took off his hat and resumed his patrol of the coast.

“This is a day of surprises,” said Wesley.

“The story of the fish is difficult to believe, in spite of the cocoon
of particulars in which it is enclosed,” said Hartwell. “The greatest
marvel in a mariner's life seems to me to be his imagination and his
readiness of resource when it comes to a question of memory. A volcano
mountain in our Channel!”

“Do not condemn the master of the revenue cutter too hastily,” said
Wesley. “His story corresponds very nearly to that narrated to me
yesterday by Polwhele.”

“Is't possible? True, Polwhele was the only fisherman who went out to
the reef three nights ago,” said Hartwell. “And the strange sounds----”

“He heard them also--he thought that they came from a frigate
discharging a broadside of carronades.”

Hartwell was silent for some time. At last he said:

“I could wish that these mysterious happenings had come at some other
time. Are you rested sufficiently in this place, sir? I am longing for
a cool room, where I can think reasonably of all that I have seen and
heard this day.”

Wesley rose from the hollow where he had made his seat and walked slowly
down the sloping path toward the village. But long before they had
reached the place of his sojourning, he became aware of a scene of
excitement in the distance. The double row of straggling cottages
that constituted the village of Porthawn they had left in the morning
standing far beyond the long and steep ridge of shingle, at the base of
which the wrack of high water lay, was now close to the water's edge.
The little wharf alongside of which the fishing boats were accustomed
to lie had been hauled up practically to the very doors of the houses.
Scores of men and women were engaged in the work of hauling them
still higher, not by the machinery of the capstans--the capstans were
apparently submerged--but by hawsers. The sound of the sailors'
“Heave ho!” came to the ear of Wesley and his companion a few seconds
after they had seen the bending to the haul of all the people who were
clinging to the hawsers as flies upon a thread. The shore was dark with
men running with gear-tackles with blocks, while others were labouring
along under the weight of spars and masts that had been hastily
outstepped.

Mr. Hartwell was speechless with astonishment.

“It is indeed a day of wonder!” exclaimed Wes--ley. “A high tide? Ay;
but who could have believed such an one possible? Should we not be doing
well to lend them a hand in their emergency?”

He had to repeat his question before the other had recovered from his
astonishment sufficiently to be able to reply.

“Such a tide! Such a tide!” he muttered. “What can it mean? Lend a hand?
Surely--surely! Every hand is needed there.”

They were compelled to make a detour landward in order to reach the
people, for the ordinary path was submerged, but they were soon in the
midst of them, and bending to the work of hauling, until the drops fell
from their faces, when the heavy boat at which they laboured had her
bowsprit well-nigh touching the window of the nearest house.

Wesley dropped upon a stone and wiped his forehead, and some of the
fishermen did the same, while others were loosing the tackles, in
readiness to bind them on the next boat.

Nelly Polwhele was kneeling beside him in an instant--her hair had
become unfastened, for she had been working hard with the other women,
and fell in strands down her back and over her shoulders. Her face was
wet.

“Oh, sir; this is overmuch for you!” she cried.

“Far overmuch, after all that you have gone through since morning. Pray
rest you in the shade. There is a jug of cider cooling in a pail of
water fresh drawn from the well. You need refreshment.”

He took her hand, smiling.

“I am refreshed, dear child,” he said. “I am refreshed.”

“Why should that man he treated different from the rest of us; tell
me that,” came the voice of a man who had been watching them, and now
stepped hastily forward. Wesley saw that he was Bennet. “Is there a man
in the village who doesn't know that 'tis John Wesley and his friends
that has brought this visitation upon us? Was there anything like to
this before he came with his new-fangled preaching, drawing down the
wrath of Heaven upon such as have been fool enough to join themselves
to him? Was there any of you, men, that thought with trembling limbs and
sweating foreheads of the Day of Judgment until John Wesley turned
the head of that poor man Pritchard, and made him blaspheme, wrapping
himself in Wesley's old cloak, and telling you that'twas the mantle of a
prophet?”

Nelly had risen to her feet before his last sentence was spoken, but a
moment afterward she sprang to one side with a cry. She was just in
time to avoid the charge of a man on horseback. But Bennet was not so
fortunate. Before he was aware of a danger threatening him, he felt
himself carried off his feet, a strong man's hands grasping the collars
of his coat, so that he was swung off the ground, dangling and scrawling
like a puppet. Down the horse sprang into the water, until it was
surging over the pommel of the saddle. Then, and only then, the rider
loosed his hold, reining in his horse with one hand, while with the
other he flung the man headforemost a couple of yards farther into the
waves.

“The hound! the hound! that will cool his ardour!” cried Parson Rodney,
backing his horse out of the water, while the people above him roared,
and the man, coming to the surface like a grampus, struck out for a part
of the beach most remote from the place where he had stood.

Wesley was on his feet and had already taken a step or two down the
shingle, for Parson Rodney's attitude suggested his intention of
preventing the man from landing, when he saw that Bennet was a strong
swimmer, and that he, too, had put the same interpretation upon the
rider's raising of his hunting crop.

“Sir,” said Parson Rodney, bringing his dripping horse beside him, “I
grieve that any man in my parish should put such an affront upon you.
Only so gross a wretch would have done so. Thank Heaven the fellow is
not of Porthawn, nor a Cornishman at all. If you do not think that my
simple rebuke has been enough, I am a Justice, and I promise you to send
him to gaol for a month at next session.”

“Sir, you mean well by me,” said Wesley; “but I would not that any human
being were placed in jeopardy of his life on my account.”

“That is because you are overgentle, sir,” said Rodney. “Thank Heaven,
my fault does not lie in that direction.”

“Repent, repent, repent, while there is yet time In a few more hours
Time shall be no more!” came a loud voice from the high ground above the
bank.

Everyone turned and saw there the figure of Richard Pritchard, standing
barehead in the scorching sun, his hands upraised and his hair unkept;
and a curious nondescript garment made apparently of several sacks
hastily stitched together, with no sleeves. On his feet he wore what
looked like sandals--he had cut down the upper portion of his shoes,
so that only the sole remained, and these were fastened to his feet by
crossed pieces of tape. He was the prophet of the Bible illustration. It
was plain that he had studied some such print and that he had determined
that nothing should be lacking in his garb to make complete the part
which he meant to play.

Up again went the long, lean, bare arms, and again came the voice:

“O men of Porthawn, now is the accepted time, now is the Day of
Salvation. Yet a few more hours and Time shall be no more. Repent,
repent, repent, while ye have time.”




CHAPTER XVIII

There could be no doubt about the depth of the impression which the
strange figure and his unusual garb produced upon the people.

There he stood on the high ground above the houses, the man who had
prophesied the end of the world, while beneath them tumbled the waves of
a sea where they had never seen sea water before! The occurrence,
being so far outside their experience, had about it the elements of the
supernatural--the aspect of a miracle. Was this the beginning of the end
of all? they asked themselves. To these people the daily ebb and flow of
the tide, ever going on before their eyes, was the type of a regularity
that nothing could change; and never once had the water been forced,
even under the influence of the strongest gale from the southwest,
beyond the summit of the shingle-heap--never until this day.

It was an awful thing that had come to pass before their eyes, and while
their brains were reeling beneath its contemplation there rang out that
voice of warning. The man who had predicted an event that was not more
supernatural in their eyes than the one which had come to their very
feet, was there bidding them repent.

But strange to say, there was not one among the-people assembled
there who made a motion--who cried out in conviction of the need for
repentance, as hundreds had done upon every occasion of John. Wesley's
preaching, although it had contained no element that, in the judgment of
an ordinary person, would appeal with such force to the emotions of the
villagers as did the scene in which Pritchard now played a part.

They remained unmoved--outwardly, however shrinking with terror some of
them may have been. Perhaps it was they felt that the man had, in a way,
threatened them physically, and they had a feeling that it would show
cowardice on their part to betray their fear, or it may have been that,
as was nearly always the case when a prophet came to a people, they
attributed to the bearer of the messages of the ill the responsibility
for the ills which he foretold--however it may have been, the people
only glanced up at the weird figure, and made no move.

But the appearance of the man at that moment had the effect of making
them forget the scene which had immediately preceded the sound of his
voice. No one looked to see whether or not John Bennet had scrambled
back to the beach or had gone under the waters.

“It is coming--it is coming: I hear the sound of the hoofs of the pale
Horse--yonder is the red Horse spoken of by the prophet at Patmos, but
the White Horse is champing his bit. I hear the clink of the steel,
and Death is his rider. He cometh with fire and brimstone.
Repent--repent--repent!”

“I have a mind to make the fellow repent of his impudence,” said Parson
Rodney. “The effrontery of the man trying to make me play a part in his
quackery. I wonder how this water-finder would find the water if I were
to give him the ducking I gave to the other?”

“You would do wrong, sir,” said Wesley. “But I feel that I have no need
to tell you so: your own good judgment tells you that yonder man is to
be pitied rather than punished.”

“Oh, if that is the view you take of the matter, you may be sure that
I'll not interfere,” cried the other. “The fellow may quack or croak or
crow for aught I care.'Twas for you I was having thought. But I've no
intention of constituting my humble self your champion. I wish you well;
and I know that if the world gets over the strain of Monday, we shall
never see you in our neighbourhood again.”

“The elements shall melt with fervent heat. You feel it--you feel it on
your faces to-day: I foretold it, and I was sent to cry unto all that
have ears to hear, 'Repent--repent--repent'!”

“The fellow has got no better manner than a real prophet,” laughed
Parson Rodney; but there was not much merriment in his laughter. “I
have a mind to have him brought before me as an incorrigible rogue and
vagabond,” he continued. “An hour or twain in the stocks would make
him think more civilly of the world. If he becomes bold enough to be
offensive to you, Mr. Wesley, give me a hint of it, and I'll promise you
that I'll make him see more fire and brimstone than he ever did in one
of his ecstatic moods; and so good-day to you, sir.”

He put his horse to a trot, and returned the salutes of the men who were
standing idly watching Pritchard in his very real sackcloth.

But he had scarcely ridden past them when he turned his horse and called
out:

“Wherefore are you idle, good men? Do you mean to forsake the remainder
of your smacks?”

A few of the fishermen looked at one another; they shook their heads;
one of them wiped his forehead.

“'Twill be all the same after Monday, Parson,” said that man.

“You parboiled lobster-grabber!” cried the Parson. “Do you mean to say
that you have the effrontery to believe that addle-pate up there rather
than a clergyman of the Church of England? Look at him. He's not a
man.'Tis a poor cut torn from, a child's picture Bible that he is! Do
you believe that the world would come to an end without your properly
ordained clergyman giving you a hint of it? Go on with your work, if you
are men. Repent? Ay, you'll all repent when 'tis too late, if you fail
to haul up your boats so that their backs get not broken on that ridge.
If you feel that you must repent, do it hauling. And when you've done
your work, come up to the Rectory and cool your throats with a jug of
cider, cool from the cellar, mind.”

“There shall be no more sea,” came the voice of the man on the mound; it
was growing appreciably hoarser.

“No more sea?” shouted the parson. “That's an unlucky shot of yours, my
addle-pated prophet; 'tis too much sea that we be suffering from just
here.”

Wesley had not reseated himself. He put his hand upon Mr. Hartwell's
arm. The latter understood what he meant. They walked away together.

“I have seen nothing sadder for years,” said Wesley. “I have been asking
myself if I am to blame. Should not I have been more careful in regard
to that unhappy man?”

“If blame is to be attached to any it is to be attached to those who
recommended the man to you, and I was among them,” said Hartwell. “I
recall how you were not disposed to accept him into our fellowship by
reason of his work with the divining rod; but we persuaded you against
your judgment. I, for one, shall never forgive myself.”

“Was ever aught so saddening as that travesty of the most solemn
event?” said Wesley. “And then the spectacle of that well-meaning but
ill-balanced man! A clergyman of our Church--you saw him turn to mock
the wretch? He made a jest upon the line that has never failed to send a
thrill through me: 'No more sea.' Shocking--shocking!... Friend, I
came hither with the full intention of administering a rebuke to
Pritchard--of openly letting it be understood that we discountenanced
him. But I did not do so to-day, and I am glad of it. However vain
the man may be--however injuriously he may affect our aims among the
people--I am still glad that I was turned away from saying a word
against him.”

Mr. Hartwell was too practical a man to look at the matter in the same
light. But he said nothing further about Pritchard. When he spoke, which
he did after a time, it was about Bennet. He asked Wesley if he could
guess why the man had spoken to him so bitterly. Why should the man bear
him a grudge?

Wesley mentioned that Bennet had come upon him when he was walking with
Polwhele's daughter from the Mill.

“Ah, that is the form of his madness--he becomes insanely jealous of
anyone whom he sees near that girl. But one might have thought that
you at least--oh, absurdity could go no further! But a jealous man is
a madman; he is incapable of looking at even the most ordinary incident
except through green glasses. You are opposed to clergymen marrying, are
you not, Mr. Wesley? I have heard of your book-----”

“I wrote as I was persuaded at that time,” replied Wesley. “But more
recently--I am not confident that I did not make a mistake in my
conclusions. I am not sure that it is good for a man to be alone; and
a clergyman, of all men, needs the sympathy--the sweet and humane
companionship of a woman.”

“True, sir; but if a clergymen makes a mistake in his choice of a wife,
there can be no question that his influence declines; and so many men
of your cloth wreck themselves on the quicksand of matrimony. I daresay
that 'tis your own experience of this that keeps you single, though you
may have modified your original views on the subject. Strange, is't not,
that we should find ourselves discussing such a point at this time?
But this seems to be the season of strange things, and 'twould be the
greatest marvel of all if we ourselves were not affected. Is it the
terrible heat, think you, that has touched the heads of those two men?”

“I scarce know what I should think,” said Wesley. “The case of Pritchard
is the more remarkable. Only now it occurred to me that there may be a
strange affinity between the abnormal in nature and the mind of such a
man as he.'Twould be idle to contend that he has not been able as a
rule to say where water is to be found on sinking a shaft; I have heard
several persons testify to his skill in this particular--if it may be
called skill. Does not his possession of this power then suggest that
he may be so constituted that his senses may be susceptible of certain
vague suggestions which emanate from the earth, just as some people
catch ague--I have known of such in Georgia--when in the neighbourhood
of a swamp, while others remain quite unaffected in health?”

“That is going too far for me, sir,” said Hartwell. “I do not need to
resort to anything more difficult to understand than vanity to enable
me to understand how Pritchard has changed. The fellow's head has been
turned--that's all.”

“That explanation doth not wholly satisfy me,” said Wesley. “I think
that we have at least some proof that he was sensible of something
abnormal in Nature, and this sensibility acting upon his brain disposed
him to take a distorted view of the thing. His instinct in this matter
may have been accurate; but his head was weak. He receives an impression
of something strange, and forthwith he begins to talk of the Day of
Judgment, and his foolish vanity induces him to think of himself as
a prophet. The Preventive officer thinks that there hath been an
earthquake. Now there can, I think, be no doubt that Pritchard was
sensible of its coming; Pol-whele told you yesterday that he had
predicted an earthquake in the sea, although it seemed that his
illiteracy was accountable for this: and now there comes this remarkable
tide--the highest tide that the memory of man has known.”

“You have plainly been giving the case of Pritchard much of your
attention,” said Hartwell; “but I pray you to recall his account of the
vision which he said came to him when he fell into that trance. 'Twas
just the opposite to a high tide--'twas such an ebbing of the water as
left bare the carcase of the East Indiaman that went ashore on the Dog's
Teeth reef forty years ago.”

“True; but to my way of thinking it matters not whether 'twas a
prodigious ebb or a prodigious flow that he talked of so long as he was
feeling the impression of the unusual--of the extraordinary. Mind you,
I am only throwing out a hint of a matter that may become, if approached
in a proper spirit, a worthy subject for sober philosophical thought.
God forbid that I should take it upon me to say at this moment that the
power shown by that man is from the Enemy of mankind, albeit I have at
times found myself thinking that it could come from no other source.”

“You are too lenient, I fear, Mr. Wesley. For myself, I believe simply
that the man's head has been turned. Is't not certain that a devil
enters into such men as are mad, and have we not proof that witches
and warlocks have sometimes the perverted gift of prophecy, through the
power of their master, the Old Devil?”

“I cannot gainsay it, my brother, and it is because of this you say,
that I am greatly perplexed.”

They had been walking very slowly, for the heat of the day seemed to
have increased, and they were both greatly exhausted. Before entering
Mr. Hartwell's house they stood for a short time looking seaward. There,
as before, the waves danced under the rays of the sun, although not a
breath of air stirred between the sea and the sky. The canopy of the
heaven was blue, but it suggested the blue of hard steel rather than
that of the transparent sapphire or that of the soft mass of a bed of
forget-me-nots, or of the canopy of clematis which clambered over the
porch.

The sun that glared down from the supreme height was like to no other
sun they had ever seen. The haze on its disc, to which the Preventive
officer had drawn their attention an hour earlier, had been slowly
growing in the meantime, until now it was equal to four diameters of the
orb itself, and it was so permeated with the rays that it seemed part of
the sun itself. There that mighty furnace seethed with intolerable fire,
and so singular was the haze that one, glancing for a moment upward with
hand on forehead, seemed to see the huge tongues of flame that burst
forth now and again as they do beneath a copper cauldron on the furnace
of the artificer.

But this was not all, for at a considerable distance from the molten
mass, which had the sun for its core, there was a wide ring apparently
of fire. Though dull as copper for the most part, yet at times there
was a glow as of living and not merely reflected flame, at parts of the
brazen circle, and flashes seemed to go from the sun to this cincture,
conveying the impression of an enormous shield, having the sun as the
central boss of shining brass, on which fiery darts were striking,
flying off again to the brass binding of the targe.

“Another marvel!” said Wesley; “but I have seen the dike more than once
before. Once 'twas on the Atlantic, and the master of our ship, who was
a mariner of experience, told me that that outer circle was due to the
sun shining through particles of moisture. Hold up a candle in the mist
and you have the same thing.”

“I myself have seen it more than once; 'tis not a marvel, though it has
appeared on a day of marvels,” said Hartwell; and forthwith they entered
the house.

They were both greatly exhausted, the fact being that before setting
out for the preaching in the early morning they had taken no more than a
glass of milk and a piece of bread, and during the seven hours that
had elapsed they had tasted nothing, though the day had been a most
exhausting one.

In a very few minutes the cold dinner, with the salad, which had been in
readiness for their return, found them grateful; and after partaking of
it Wesley retired to his room.

He threw himself upon a couch that stood under the window; a group of
trees, though birch and not very bosky, grew so close to the window that
they had made something of a shade to the room since morning, so that
it was the coolest in the house. It was probably this sense of coolness
that refreshed him so far as to place him within the power of sleep. He
had thought it impossible when he entered the house that he should be
able to find such a relief, exhausted as he had been. But now he had
scarcely put his head on the pillow before he was asleep.

Several hours had passed before he opened his eyes again. He was
conscious that a great change of some sort, that he could not at once
define, had taken place. The room was in shadow where before it had
been lighted by flecks of sunshine, but this was not the change which
appealed to him with striking force; nor was it the sense of being
refreshed, of which he was now aware. There was a curious silence in the
world--the change had something to do with the silence. He felt as he
had done in the parlour of Ruthallion Mill when he had been talking
to the miller and the machinery had suddenly stopped for the breakfast
hour. That was his half-awakened thought.

The next moment he was fully awake, and he knew what had happened: when
he had fallen asleep the sound of the waves had been in his ears without
cessation, and now the sea was silent.

He thought that he had never before been in such a silence. It seemed
strange, mysterious, full of awful suggestions. It seemed to his vivid
imagination that the world, which a short time before had been full of
life, had suddenly swooned away. The hush was the hush of death. The
silence was the silence of the tomb. “'Tis thus,” he thought, “that a
man awakens after death--in a place of awful silences.”

And then he felt as if all the men in the world had been cut off in a
moment, leaving him the only man alive.

It continued unbroken while he lay there. It became a nightmare
silence--an awful palpable thing like a Sphinx--a blank dumbness--a
benumbing of all Nature--a sealing up of all the world as in the hard
bondage of an everlasting Winter.

He sprang from his couch unable to endure the silence any longer. He
went to the window and looked out, expecting to see the flat unruffled
surface of the channel, where the numberless waves had lately been,
sparkling with intolerable, brilliance, and every wave sending its voice
into the air to join the myriad-voiced chorus that the sea made.

He looked out and started back; then he drew up the blind and stared out
in amazement, for where the sea had been there was now no sea.

He threw open the window and looked out. Far away in the utter distance
he saw what seemed like a band of glittering crimson on the horizon.
Looking further round and to the west he saw that the sun was more than
halfway down the slope of the heavens in that quarter and it was of the
darkest crimson in colour--large, but no longer fiery.

Then there came a murmur to his ears--the murmur of a multitude of
people; and above this sound came a hoarse, monotonous voice, crying:

“I heard one say to me: 'There shall be no sea--there shall be no more
sea'; and the sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood,
before the great and terrible Day of the Lord. Repent--repent--repent!”

Far away he could see the figure of the man. He stood on the summit of
the cliff beyond the path, and, facing the sinking sun, he was crimson
from head to foot. Seen at such a distance and in that light he looked
an imposing figure--a figure that appealed to the imagination, and not
lacking in those elements which for ages have been associated with the
appearance of a fearless prophet uplifting a lean right arm and crying
“Thus saith the Lord.” Wesley listened and heard his cry:

“There shall be no more sea! Repent--repent--repent!”

[Illustration: 0223]




CHAPTER XIX

What think you now, sir?” Hartwell asked of Wesley when the latter had
descended the stairs and entered the little parlour of the house.

“I am too greatly amazed to think,” replied Wesley. “But since you put
thinking into my head, I would ask you if you think it unnatural that a
great ebb should follow an unusually high tide?”

It was plain that Hartwell was greatly perturbed.

“Unnatural? Why, has not everything that has happened for the past three
days been unnatural?” he cried. “Sir, I am, I thank God, a level-headed
man. I have seen some strange things in my life, both in the mines and
when seafaring; I thought that naught could happen to startle me, but I
confess that this last--I tell you, sir, that I feel now as if I were
in the midst of a dream. My voice sounds strange to myself; it seems to
come from someone apart from me--nay, rather from myself, but outside
myself.”

“'Tis the effect of the heat, dear friend,” said Wesley. “You should
have slept as I did.”

“I did sleep, sir; what I have been asking myself is 'Am I yet awake?' I
have had dreams before like to this one--dreams of watching the sea and
other established things that convey to us all ideas of permanence and
regularity, melting away before my very eyes--one dread vision showed
me Greta Cliff crumbling away like a child's mound built on the
sand--crumbling away into the sea, and then the sea began to ebb and
soon was on the horizon. Now, I have been asking myself if I am in the
midst of that same dream again. Can it be possible? Can it be possible?”

He clapped his hand to his forehead and hastened to the window, whence
he looked out. Almost immediately he returned to Wesley, saying:

“I pray you to inform me, sir, if this is the truth or a dream--is it
really the case that the sea has ebbed so that there is naught left of
it?”

“You are awake, my brother,” said Wesley, “and 'tis true that the sea
hath ebbed strangely; but from the upper windows 'tis possible to see a
broad band of it in the distance. I beseech of you to lie down on your
bed and compose yourself. This day has tried you greatly.”

The other stared at him for a few moments and then walked slowly away,
muttering:

“A mystery--a mystery! Oh, the notion of Dick Pritchard being a true
prophet! Was it of such stuff as this the old prophets were made? God
forgive me if I erred in thinking him one of the vain fellows. Mr.
Wesley's judgment was not at fault; he came hither to preach against
him; but not a word did he utter of upbraiding or reproof.”

Wesley saw that the man was quite overcome. Up to this moment he had
shown himself to be possessed of a rational mind, and one that was
not easily put off its balance. He had only a few hours before been
discussing Pritchard in a sober and unemotional spirit; but this last
mystery had been too much for him: the disappearance of the sea, which
had lately climbed up to the doors of Porthawn, had unhinged him and
thrown him off his balance. If the phenomenon had occurred at any other
time--under any less trying conditions of weather--he might have been
able to observe it with equanimity; but the day had been, as Wesley
said, a trying one. The intense heat was of itself prostrating, and
demoralising even to Wesley himself, and he had schooled himself to be
unaffected by any conditions of weather.

Suddenly Hartwell turned toward his visitor, saying:

“And if the man was entrusted to predict the falling away of the sea, is
there anyone that will say that the remainder of his prophecy will not
be fulfilled?”

“I entreat of you, brother, to forbear asking yourself any further
questions until you have had a few hours' sleep,” said Wesley.

“What signifies a sleep now if before this time to-morrow the end of all
things shall have come?” Hartwell cried almost fiercely. “Nay, sir, I
shall wait with the confidence of a Christian; I shall not be found as
were the foolish virgins--asleep and with unlighted lamps. There will be
no slumber for me. I shall watch and pray.”

“Let us pray together, my brother,” said Wesley, laying his hand on the
man's shoulder affectionately. He perceived that he was not in a mood to
be reasoned with.

It was at this moment that the door was opened and there entered the
room the miller and Jake 'Pullsford.

Wesley welcomed their coming; he had hopes that they would succeed in
persuading his host to retire; but before they had been in the room for
more than a few minutes Hartwell had well-nigh become himself again.

The newcomers were not greatly affected by anything that had happened.
They were only regretful that the mist of the morning had prevented them
from reaching the Red Tor in time for the preaching. They had started
together, but had stopped upon the way to help a party of their friends
who were in search of still another party, and when the strayed ones
had been found they all had thought it prudent to remain at a farm where
they had dined.

“On our way hither we met with one who had been to the preaching,” said
Jake. “He told us something of what we had missed.”

“Were you disappointed to learn that no reference had been made to the
very matter that brought me back to you?” asked Wesley.

Jake did not answer immediately. It was apparent that he had his own
views on this matter, and that he had been expounding them to his
companion on their walk from the farm to the coast.

“Mr. Wesley, 'tis plain to me that the skill at divination shown by that
man comes from below, not from above,” he said. “And do you suppose that
our enemies will take back any of the foul things they have said about
our allying ourselves with sorcery when they hear of the wonderful
things that are now happening?”

“Brother,” said Wesley, “if the principles of the Truth which we have
been teaching are indeed true, they will survive such calumnies--nay,
they will take the firmer hold upon all who have heard us by reason of
such calumnies. The gold of the Truth has oft been tried by the fire of
calumny and proved itself to be precious.”

“You saw the man play-acting in his sackcloth?” said the carrier.

Wesley shook his head sadly.

“'Twas deplorable!” he said. “And yet I dare not even now speak against
him--no, not a word.”

“What, sir, you do not believe that he is a sorcerer and a soothsayer?”
 cried Jake.

“I have not satisfied myself that he is either,” replied Wesley. “More
than once since I saw how much evil was following on his predictions I
have felt sure that he was an agent of our Arch-enemy, but later I have
not felt quite so confident in my judgment. No, friend, I shall not
judge him. He is in the hands of God.”

“And I agree with Mr. Wesley,” said the miller.

Jake Pullsford, with his hands clasped behind him and his head craned
forward, was about to speak, when Hal Holmes entered the room. He was
excited.

“Have you seen it?” he cried before he had greeted anyone. “Have you
seen it--the vision of his trance at the Mill--the tide sliding away as
it hath never done before within the memory of man?--the discovery of
the bare hollow basin of the sea? Have you been within sight of the
Dog's Teeth?”

“We--Mr. Hartwell and I--have not been out of doors for six hours; but
we are going now,” said Wesley. “We have seen some of the wonders that
have happened; we would fain witness all.”

“Oh, sir,” said the blacksmith, “this one is the first that I have seen,
and seeing it has made me think that we were too hasty in condemning
poor Dick Pritchard. We need your guidance, sir. Do you hold that a
man may have the gift of prophecy in this Dispensation, without being a
sorcerer, and the agent of the Fiend?”

“Alas! 'tis not I that can be your guide in such a matter,” said Wesley.
“You must join with me in seeking for guidance from above. Let us go
forth and see what is this new wonder.”

“'Tis the vision of his trance--I saw it with these eyes as I passed
along the high ground above the Dog's Teeth Reef--the reef was well-nigh
bare and naked,” said Hal. “Who is there of us that could tell what the
bottom of the sea looked like? We knew what the simple slopes of the
beach were--the spaces where the tide was wont to ebb and flow over
are known to all; but who before since the world began saw those secret
hidden deeps where the lobsters lurk and crabs half the size of a
man's body--I saw them with these eyes a while agone--and the little
runnels--a thousand of them, I believe, racing through channels in the
slime as if they were afraid to be left behind when the sea was ebbing
out of sight--and the sun turned all into the colour of blood! What does
it all mean, Mr. Wesley--I do not mean the man's trance-dream, but the
thing itself that hath come to pass?”

“We shall go forth and be witnesses of all,” said Wesley.

He was not excited; but this could not be said of his companions; they
betrayed their emotions in various ways. Mr. Hartwell and the miller
were silent and apparently stolid; but the carrier and the smith talked.

Very few minutes sufficed to bring them to the summit of the cliff that
commanded a full view seaward. At high tide the waves just reached
the base of these cliffs, and the furthest ebb only left bare about a
hundred feet of sand and shingle, with large smooth pebbles in ridges
beyond the groins of the out-jutting rocks. But now it was a very
different picture from that of the ordinary ebb that stretched away to
the horizon under the eyes of our watchers.

The sandy breadth, with its many little ribs made by the waves, sloped
into a line of sparse sea weed, tangled tufts of green and brown, and
some long and wiry, and others flat with large and leathery bosses, like
the studs of a shield. But beyond this space the rocks of the sea-bed
began to show, There they were in serrated rows--rocks that had never
before been seen by human eyes. Some lay in long sharp ridges, with
here and there a peak of a miniature mountain, and beyond these lines
of ridges there was a broad tableland, elevated in places and containing
huge hollow basins brimming over with water, out of which every now and
again a huge fish leaped, only to find itself struggling among the thick
weeds. Further away still there was a great breadth of ooze, and then
peak beyond peak of rocks, to which huge, grotesque weeds were clinging,
having the semblance of snakes coiled round one another and dying in
that close embrace.

Looking over these strange spaces was like having a bird's-eye view
of an unexplored country of mountains and tablelands and valleys
intersected by innumerable streams. The whole breadth of sea-bed was
veined with little streams hurrying away after the lost sea, and all the
air was filled with the prattling and chattering that went on through
these channels.

And soon one became aware of a strange motion of struggling life among
the forests of sea weed. At first it seemed no more than a quivering
among the giant growths; but soon one saw the snake's head and the
narrow shoulders of a big conger eel, from five to seven feet long,
pushed through the jungle of ooze, to be followed by the wriggling body;
there were congers by the hundred, and the hard-dying dog-fishes by the
score, flapping and forcing their way from stream to stream. Stranded
dying fish of all sorts made constant movements where they lay, and
whole breadths of the sea-bed were alive with hurrying, scurrying
crabs and lobsters and cray-fish. Some of these were of enormous size,
patriarchs of the deep that had lurked for ages far out of reach of the
fisherman's hook, and had mangled many a creel.

The weirdness of this unparalleled picture was immeasurably increased
by its colouring, for over all there was spread what had the effect of a
delicate crimson gauze. The whole of the sea-bed was crimson, for it was
still dripping wet, and glistening with reflections of the red western
sky. At the same time the great heat of the evening was sucking the
moisture out of the spongy sea weeds, and there it remained in the form
of a faint steam permeated with the crimson light.

And through all that broad space under the eyes of the watchers on
the cliff there was no sign of a human being. They might have been the
explorers of stout Cortez who stared at the Pacific from that peak in
Darien. It was not until they had gone in silence for a quarter of a
mile along the cliff path that they saw where the people of the village
had assembled. The shore to the westward came into view and they saw
that a crowd was there. The sound of the voices of the crowd came to
their ears, and above it the hard, high monotone like that of a town
crier uttering the words that Wesley had heard while yet in his room:

“There shall be no more sea. Repent--repent--repent.”

Once more they stood and looked down over the part of the coast that
had just been disclosed--the eastern horn of Greta Bay, but no familiar
landmark was to be seen; on the contrary, it seemed to them that they
were looking down upon a new and curious region. The line of cliffs was
familiar to their eyes, but what was that curious raised spine--that
long sharp ridge stretching outwards for more than a mile on the
glistening shore?

And what was that strange object--that huge bulk lying with one end
tilted into the air on one shoulder of that sharp ridge?

All at once Wesley had a curious feeling that he had seen all that
before. The sight of that mighty bulk and the knowledge that it was the
heavy ribbed framework of a large ship seemed familiar. But when or how
had he seen it?

It was not until Hartwell spoke that he understood how this impression
had come to him.

“You see it--there--there--just as he described it to us when he awoke
from his trance?” said Hartwell.

And there indeed it was--the fabric of the East Indiaman that had been
wrecked years before on the Dog's Teeth Reef, and there was the Dog's
Teeth Reef laid bare for the first time within the memory of man!

It was the skeleton of a great ship. The outer timbers had almost wholly
disappeared--after every gale for years before some portion of the
wreckage had come ashore and had been picked up by the villagers; but
the enormous framework to which the timbers of the hull had been bolted
had withstood the action of the waves, for the ship had sunk into a
cradle of rock that held her firmly year after year. There it lay like
the skeleton of some tremendous monster of the awful depths of the
sea--the Kraken--a survival of the creatures that lived before the
Flood. The three stumps of masts which stood up eight or ten feet above
the line of bulwarks gave a curious suggestion to a creature's deformed
legs, up in the air while it lay stranded on its curved back.

And the crimson sunset shot through the huge ribs of this thing and
spread their distorted shadows sprawling over the sands at the base of
the reef and upon the faces of the people who stood looking up at this
wonder.

“There it is--just as he saw it in his trance!” said Hal Holmes. “He saw
it and related it to us afterward. What are we to say to all this, Mr.
Wesley? All that he predicted so far has come to pass. Are we safe in
saying that yonder sun will be setting over a blazing world to-morrow?”

“I do not dare to say anything,” replied Wesley. “I have already
offered my opinion to Mr. Hartwell, which is that there may be a kind of
sympathy between the man and the earth, by whose aid he has been able
to discover the whereabouts of a spring in the past and to predict these
marvels of tides.”

“That is a diviner's skill derived from the demons that we know inhabit
the inside of the earth,” cried Jake Pullsford. “He has ever had
communication with these unclean things.”

“That works so far as the tides are concerned,” said the smith. “It
stands to reason that the demons of the nether world must know all
about the ebb and flow; but how did he foresee the laying bare of yonder
secret?” He pointed to the body; of the wreck.

“Was it not the same demons that dragged the ship to destruction on the
reef, and is't not within their province to know all that happens below
the surface of the sea?” said the carrier.

“Doubtless,” said the smith. “But I find it hard to think of so
moderately foolish a fellow as Dick Pritchard being hand in glove with
a fiend of any sort, and not profiting more by the traffic--as to his
secular circumstances, I should say.”

“And I find it hard to think of him as urging men to repent, if he be an
ally of the Evil One,” said Hartwell.

“This is not a case in which the wisdom of man can show itself to be
other than foolishness,” said Wesley. “But I am now moved to speak to
the people who have come hither to see the wonder. Let us hasten onward
to the highest ground. My heart is full.”

He went on with his friends to a short spur of the cliff about twenty
feet above the shingle where groups of men and women were straying;
most of them had been down to the wreck and nearly all were engaged
in discussing its marvellous appearance. Some of the elder men were
recalling for the benefit of the younger the circumstances of the loss
of the great East Indiaman, and the affluence that had come to a good
many houses in the Port, when the cargo began to be washed ashore before
the arrival of the Preventive men and the soldiery from Falmouth.

But while the larger proportion of the people were engaged in
discussing, without any sense of awe, the two abnormal tides and the
story of the wreck, there were numbers who were clearly terror-stricken
at the marvels and at the prospect of the morrow. A few women were
clinging together and moaning without cessation, a girl or two wept
aloud, a few shrieked hysterically, and one began to laugh and gibber,
pointing monkey hands in the direction of the wreck. But further on half
a dozen young men and maidens were engaged in a boisterous and an almost
shocking game preserved in Cornwall and some parts of Wales through
the ages that had elapsed since it was practised by a by-gone race
of semi-savages. They went through it now in the most abandoned and
barbaric way, dancing like Bacchanalians in a ring, with shouts and wild
laughter.

John Wesley, who knew what it was to be human, had no difficulty in
perceiving that these wretched people were endeavouring in such excesses
to conceal the terror they felt, and he was not surprised to find a
number of intoxicated men clinging together and singing wildly in the
broad moorland space that lay on the landward side of the cliffs.

“This is the work of Pritchard the water-finder, and will you say that
'tis not of the Devil?” cried Jake Pullsford.

“Poor wretches! Oh, my poor brothers and sisters!” cried Wesley. “Our
aim should be to soothe them, not to denounce them. Never have they been
subjected to such a strain as that which has been put upon them. I
can understand their excesses. 'Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we
die'--that is the cry which comes from all hearts that have not been
regenerated.'Tis the cry of the old Paganism which once ruled the world,
before the sweet calm of Christianity brought men from earth to heaven.
I will speak to them.”

He had reached the high ground with his friends. There was a sudden spur
on the range of low cliffs just where the people were most numerous.
They had come from all quarters to witness the wonders of this lurid
eve, and, as was the case at Wesley's preaching, everyone was asking of
everyone else how so large an assembly could be brought together in a
neighbourhood that was certainly not densely populated. On each side
of him and on the beach below there were crowds, and on every face the
crimson of the sinking sun flamed. He went out to the furthest point of
the cliff-spur and stood there silent, with uplifted arms.

In a moment the whisper spread:

“Mr. Wesley has come--Mr. Wesley is preaching!”

There was the sound of many feet trampling down the pebbles of the
beach. The people flowed toward him like a great wave slowly moving over
that place now forsaken by the waves. The young men and maidens who had
been engaged in that fierce wild dance among the wiry herbage flocked
toward him, their faces shining from their exertions, and stood catching
their breath. The old men who had been staring stolidly through the
great ribs of the hulk, slouched through the ooze and stood sideways
beneath him, their hands, like the gnarled joints of a thorn, scooped
behind their ears lest they should lose a word. The women, with
disordered hair, tears on their faces, the terror of anticipation
in their eyes, waited on the ground, some kneeling, others seated in
various postures.

Then there came a deep hush.

He stood there, a solitary figure, black against the crimson background
of the western sky, his arms still upraised. It might have been a statue
carved out of dark marble that stood on the spur of the cliff.

And then he began to speak.

His hands were still uplifted in the attitude of benediction; and the
words that came from him were the words of the Benediction.

“The Peace of God which passeth all understanding.”

The Peace of God--that was the message which he delivered to that
agitated multitude, and it fell upon their ears, soothing all who heard
and banishing their fears. He gave them the message of the Father to His
children--a message of love, of tenderness--a promise of protection, of
infinite pity, of a compassion that knew no limits--outliving the life
of the world, knowing no change through all ages, the only thing that
suffered no change--a compassion which, being eternal, would outlive
Time itself--a compassion which brought with it every blessing that man
could know--nay, more--more than man could think of; a compassion that
brought with it the supreme blessing that could come to man--the Peace
of God which passeth all understanding!

He never travelled outside this message of Divine Peace, although he
spoke for a full hour.

And while he spoke the meaning of that message fell upon the multitude
who listened. They felt that Peace of which he spoke falling gently
upon them as cold dew at the close of a day of intolerable heat. They
realised what it meant to them. The Peace descended upon them, and they
were sensible of its presence. The dread that had been hanging over them
all the day was swept away as the morning mist had been dispersed. The
apprehension of the Judgment was lost in the consciousness of a Divine
Love surrounding them. They seemed to have passed from an atmosphere of
foetid vapours into that of a meadow in the Spring time. They drank deep
draughts of its sweetness and were refreshed.

When he had begun to speak the sun was not far from setting in the
depths of a crimson sky, and before he had spoken for half an hour the
immense red disc, magnified by the vapours in the air, was touching the
horizon. With its disappearance the colour spread higher up the sky and
drifted round to the north, gradually changing to the darkest purple.
Even then it was quite possible for the people to see one another's
features distinctly in the twilight, but half an hour later the figure
of the preacher was but faintly seen through the dimness that had fallen
over the coast. The twilight had been almost tropical in its brevity,
and the effect of the clear voice of many modulations coming out of the
darkness was strange, and to the ears that heard it, mysterious. Just
before it ceased there swept upon the faces of his listeners a cool
breath of air. It came with a suddenness that was startling. During all
the day there had not been a breath. The heat had seemed to be so solid,
and now the movement of the air gave the impression of the passing of a
mysterious Presence. It was as if the wings of a company of angels were
winnowing the air, as they fled by, bringing with them the perfume of
their Paradise for the refreshing of the people of the earth. Only for
a few minutes that cool air was felt, but for that time it was as if the
Peace of God had been made tangible.

When the preacher ended with the words with which he had begun, the
silence was like a sigh.

The people were on their knees. There was no one that did not feel that
God was very nigh to him.

And the preacher felt it most deeply of all. There was a silence of
intense solemnity, before the voice was heard once more speaking to
Heaven in prayer--in thanksgiving for the Peace that had come upon this
world from above.

He knew how fully his prayer had been answered when he talked to the
young men and maidens who had been among his hearers. The excitement of
the evening had passed away from all of them. At the beginning of his
preaching there had been the sound of weeping among them. At first it
had been loud and passionate; but gradually it had subsided until at the
setting of the sun the terror which had possessed them gave place to the
peace of the twilight, and now there was not one of them that did
not feel the soothing influence that comes only when the angel of the
evening hovers with shadowy outspread wings over the world.

They all walked slowly to their homes; some belonged to Porthawn and
others to the inland villages of the valley of the Lana, as far away as
Ruthallion, and the light breeze that had been felt during the preaching
became stronger and less intermittent now. It was cool and gracious
beyond expression, and it brought with it to the ears of all who walked
along the cliffs the soothing whisper of the distant sea. The joyous
tidings came that the sea was returning, and it seemed that with that
news came also the assurance that the cause for dread was over and past.

And all this time the preacher had made no allusion to the voice that
had sounded along the shore in the early part of the evening predicting
the overthrow of the world. All that he had done was to preach the
coming of Peace.

“You may resume your journeying, Mr. Wesley, as soon as you please. May
he not, friend Pullsford?” said Hartwell when he had returned to his
house. “There is no need for us to keep Mr. Wesley among us when we
know that he is anxious to resume his preaching further west. You never
mentioned the man's name, sir, and yet you have done all--nay, far more
than we thought it possible for you to accomplish.”

“There is no need for me to tarry longer,” replied Wesley. “But I pray
of you, my dear friends, not to think that I do not recognise the need
there was for me to return to you with all speed. I perceived the great
danger that threatened us through Pritchard, and I was glad that you
sent for me. I hope you agree with me in believing that that danger is
no longer imminent.”

“I scarce know how it happened,” said Hartwell; “but yesterday I had
a feeling that unless you preached a direct and distinct rebuke to
Pritchard, the work which you began here last month would suffer
disaster, and yet albeit you did no more than preach the Word as you
might at any time, making no reference to the things that have happened
around us, I feel at the present moment that your position is, by the
Grace of God, more promising of good than it has ever been.”

“Ay,” said Jake Pullsford. “But I am not so sure that the vanity of that
man should not have been crushed. There is no telling to what length
he may not go after all that has happened. The people should ha' been
warned against him, and his sorceries exposed.”.

“Think you, Jake, that the best way to destroy the vanity of such as
he would be by taking notice of what he said and magnifying it into a
menace?” said Hartwell. “Believe me, my friend, that Mr. Wesley's way is
the true one. Dick Pritchard's vanity got its hugest filip when he heard
that Mr. Wesley had come back to preach against him. It will receive its
greatest humiliation when he learns that Mr. Wesley made no remark that
showed he knew aught of him and his prophecies.”

“He will take full credit to himself for what has happened--of that you
may be sure,” said Jake, shaking his head. “Ay, and for what did not
happen,” he continued as an afterthought. “Be certain that he will claim
to have saved the world as Jonah saved the Ninevites. He will cling to
Jonah to the end.”

“I am glad that I came hither when you called for me, my brethren,”
 said Wesley. “Let us look at the matter with eyes that look only at the
final issue. I would fain banish from my mind every thought save one,
and that is spiritual blessing of the people. If they have been
soothed by my coming--if even the humblest of them has been led to
feel something of what is meant by the words 'the Peace of God,' I give
thanks to God for having called me back. I have no more to say.”

And that was indeed the last word that was said at that time respecting
Pritchard and his utterances. Wesley and his friends felt that, however
deeply the people had been impressed by the natural phenomena which had
followed hard on his predictions of disaster to the world, he would not
now be a source of danger to the work which had been begun in Cornwall.
Wesley had, by his preaching, showed that he would give no countenance
to the man. Those who thought that it would be consistent with his
methods and his Methodism to take advantage of the terror with which the
minds of the people had become imbued, in order to bring them into the
classes, that had already been formed, were surprised to find him doing
his utmost to banish their fears. He had preached the Gospel of Peace,
not of Vengeance, the Gospel of Love, not of Anger.

Awakening shortly after midnight, Wesley heard the sound of the washing
of the waters on the pebbles at the base of the cliffs. There was no
noise of breaking waves, only the soft, even lisp and lap of the last
ripples that were crushed upon the pebbles--grateful and soothing to his
ears.

Suddenly there came to him another sound--the monotone of the watchman
calling out of the distance:

“Repent--repent--repent! The Day of the Lord is at hand. Who shall abide
the Day of His Wrath? Repent--repent--repent!”




CHAPTER XX

The sunlight was in his room when he awoke. He had a sense of
refreshment. A weight seemed lifted off his heart. He remembered how
he had awakened the previous morning in the same bed with a feeling of
perplexity. He had found it impossible to make up his mind as to the
course he should pursue in regard to Pritchard. He had been fearful of
being led to rebuke a man who might have been made the means of leading
even one sinner to repentance. He asked himself if he differed as much
from that man as the average churchman did from himself in his methods.
He knew how grievous he regarded the rebukes which he had received from
excellent clergymen who looked on his field preaching with the sternest
disapproval; and who then was he that he should presume to rebuke a man
who had been led by his zeal beyond what he, Wesley, thought to be the
bounds of propriety?

He had felt great perplexity on awakening on that Sunday morning; but he
had been given help to see his way clearly on that morning of mist, and
now he felt greatly at ease. He had nothing to reproach himself with.

He recalled all the events of the day before--all that his eyes had
seen--all that his ears had heard; and now that he had no further need
to think about Pritchard, it was surprising how much he had to recall
that had little to do with that man. He himself felt somewhat surprised
that above all that had been said to him during the day the words that
he should dwell longest upon were a few words that had fallen from Mr.
Hartwell. He had hinted to Mr. Hartwell that John Bennet had acted so
grossly in regard to him, through a mad jealousy; and Mr. Hartwell,
hearing this, had lifted up his hands in amazement, and said:

“Absurdity could go no further!”

When Hartwell said those words Wesley had not quite grasped their full
import; his attention had been too fully occupied with the further
extravagance which he had witnessed on the part of Pritchard. But now
that his mind was at ease he recalled the words, and he had sufficient
selfpossession to ask himself if his host considered that the absurdity
was to be found in Bennet's fancying that he, Wesley, was his rival. If
so, was the absurdity to be found in the fancy that such a young woman
could think of him, Wesley, in the light of a lover; or that he should
think of the young woman as a possible wife?

He could not deny that the thought of Nelly Polwhele as his constant
companion had more than once come to him when he was oppressed with a
sense of his loneliness; and he knew that when he had got Mr. Hartwell's
letter calling him back to Porthawn he had felt that it might be that
there was what some men called Fate, but what he preferred to call
the Hand of God, in this matter. Was he being led back to have an
opportunity of seeing her again, and of learning truly if the regard
which he thought he felt for her was to become the love that sanctified
the marriage of a man with a woman?

Well, he had returned to her, and he had seen (as he fancied) her face
alight with the happiness of his return. For an hour he had thought of
the gracious possibility of being able to witness such an expression
upon her face any time that he came from a distant preaching. The
thought was a delight to him. Home--coming home! He had no home; and
surely, he felt, the longing for a home and a face to welcome him at the
door was the most natural--the most commendable--that a man could have.
And surely such a longing was not inconsistent with his devotion to the
work which he believed it was laid upon him to do while his life lasted.

He had seen her and talked with her for a short time, and felt refreshed
by being under the influence of her freshness. But then he had been
forced to banish her from his mind in order to give all his attention to
the grave matter which had brought him back to this place. He had walked
by her side through the mist the next day, and never once had he allowed
the thought of her to turn his eyes away from the purpose which had
called him forth into the mist of the morning. He thought of her
thoughtfulness in the matter of the mariner's compass with gratitude.
That was all. His heart was full of his work; there was no room in it
for anything else.

But now while he sat up in the early sunshine that streamed through his
window he felt himself free to think of her; and the more he thought of
her the more he wondered how he could ever have been led to believe what
he had already embodied in a book respecting the advantages of celibacy
for the clergy. A clergyman should not only have a knowledge of God;
a knowledge of man was essential to success in his calling; and a
knowledge of man meant a wide sympathy with men, and this he now felt
could only be acquired by one who had a home of his own. The influence
of the home and its associations could not but be the greatest to which
a man was subject. The ties that bind a man to his home were those which
bind him to his fellow-men. The _res angusta domi_, which some foolish
persons regarded as detrimental to a man's best work, were, he was now
convinced, the very incidents which enabled him to do good work, for
they enabled him to sympathise with his fellows.

Theologians do not, any more than other people, feel grateful to those
who have shown them to be in the wrong; but Wesley had nothing but the
kindliest feelings for Nelly Polwhele for having unwittingly led him
to see that the train of reasoning which he had pursued in his book was
founded upon an assumption which was in itself the result of an immature
and impersonal experience of any form of life except the Academic, and
surely such a question as he had discussed should be looked at from
every other standpoint than the Academic.

Most certainly he was now led to think of the question from very
different standpoints. He allowed his thoughts to wander to the girl
herself. He thought of her quite apart from all womankind. He had never
met any young woman who seemed to possess all the charms which endear
a woman to a man. She was bright as a young woman should be, she was
thoughtful for the needs of all who were about her, she had shown
herself ready to submit to the guidance of one who was older and more
experienced than herself. He could not forget how she had promised him
never again to enter the playhouse which had so fascinated her. Oh, she
was the most gracious creature that lived--the sweetest, the tenderest,
and surely she must prove the most devoted!

So his imagination carried him away; and then suddenly he found himself
face to face with that phrase of Mr. Hartwell's “_Absurdity could go no
further_.”

And then, of course, he began to repeat all the questions which he
had put to himself when he had started on his investigations into the
matter. Once more he said:

“_Where lies the source of all absurdities?_”

And equally as a matter of course he was once again led in the direction
that his thoughts had taken before until he found himself enquiring if
the world held another so sweet and gracious and sympathetic.

It was not until he was led once more to his starting-point that he
began to feel as he had never done before for those of his fellow-men
who allowed themselves to be carried away by dwelling on the simplest of
the questions which engrossed him.

“'Tis a repetition of yesterday morning,” said he. “We set out
pleasantly enough in the mist, and after an hour's profitless wandering
we found ourselves at the point whence we had started--ay, and the young
woman was waiting for us there in person.”

Was that morning's wandering to be typical of his life? he wondered. Was
he to be ever straying along a misty coast, and evermore to be finding
himself at the point whence he had started, with Nelly Polwhele waiting
for him there?

An absurdity, was it?

Well, perhaps--but, after all, should he not be doing well in asking Mr.
Hartwell what had been in his mind when he had made use of that phrase?

Mr. Hartwell had undoubtedly something in his mind, and he was a
level-headed man who had accustomed himself to look at matters without
prejudice and to pronounce an opinion based on his common sense. It
might be that he could see some grave reason why he, Wesley, should
dismiss that young woman forever from his thoughts--forever from his
heart.

But, of course, he reserved to himself the right to consider all that
Mr. Hartwell might say on this matter, and--if he thought it right--to
exercise his privilege of veto in regard to his conclusions. He was not
prepared to accept the judgment of Mr. Hartwell without reserve.

Following this line of thought, he quickly saw that whatever Mr.
Hartwell might have to say, and however his conclusions might be put
aside, it would be necessary for him, Wesley, to acquaint all those men
who were associated with him in his work with his intention of marrying
a certain young woman. There were his associates in London, in Bristol,
in Bath, and above all there was his brother Charles. Would they be
disposed to think that such a union would be to the advantage or to the
detriment of the work to which they were all devoted?

The moment he thought of his brother he knew what he might expect. Up to
that moment it had really never occurred to him that any objection that
might not reasonably be overruled, could be offered to his marrying
Nelly Polwhele. But so soon as he asked himself what his brother
would say when made aware of his intention, he perceived how it was
conceivable that his other friends might agree with Mr. Hartwell. For
himself, he had become impressed from the first with some of those
qualities on the part of Nelly Polwhele which, he was convinced, made
her worthy of being loved by the most fastidious of men. He had long ago
forgotten that she was only the daughter of a fisherman, and that she
owed her refinement of speech to the patronage of the Squire's daughters
whose maid she had been.

But what would his brother say when informed that it was his desire to
marry a young woman who had been a lady's maid? Would not his brother be
right to assume that such a union would be detrimental to the progress
of the work in which they were engaged? Had they not often talked
together deploring how so many of their brethren in the Church had
brought contempt upon their order through their loss of self-respect in
marrying whomsoever their dissolute patrons had ordered them to marry?
What respect could anyone have for his lordship's chaplain who was
content to sit at the side table at meals and in an emergency discharge
the duties of a butler, and comply without hesitation to his lordship's
command to marry her ladyship's maid, or, indeed, any one of the
servants whom it was found desirable to have married?

The thing was done every day; that was what made it so deplorable, he
and his brother had agreed; and in consequence day by day the influence
of the clergy was declining. Was he then prepared to jeopardise the work
to which he had set his hand by such a union as he was contemplating?

He sprang to his feet from where he had been sitting by the window.

“Heaven forgive me for having so base a thought!” he cried. “Heaven
forgive me for being so base as to class the one whom I love with such
creatures as his patron orders his chaplain to marry! She is a good
and innocent child, and if she will come to me I shall feel honoured. I
shall prove to all the world that a woman, though lowly-born, may yet be
a true helpmeet for such as I. She will aid me in my labours, not impede
them. I know now that I love her. I know now that she will be a blessing
to me. I love her, and I pray that I may ever love her truly and
honestly.”

It was characteristic of the man that the very thought of opposition
should strengthen him. An hour earlier he had been unable to assure
himself that his feeling for her was love, but now he felt assured on
this point: he loved her, and he had never before loved a woman. She was
the first fruit of his mission to Cornwall. She had professed the
faith to which even he himself had failed to attain until he had been
preaching for years. Bound to her by a tie that was the most sacred that
could exist between a man and a woman, his most earnest hope was to hold
her to him by another bond whose strands were interwoven with a sympathy
that was human as well as divine. His mind was made up at last.

He was early at breakfast with his host, but he did not now think it
necessary to ask Mr. Hartwell what he had meant by his reference to the
absurdity of John Bennet's jealousy. The morning gave promise of a day
of brilliant sunshine and warmth. There was nothing sinister in the
aspect of the sun, such as had been noted on the previous day.

“Ah, sir,” said Hartwell, “you came hither with a blessing to us all,
and you will leave with a sense of having accomplished by the exercise
of your own judgment far more than we looked for at such a time. The
boats have put out to the fishing ground once more, and the dread that
seemed overhanging our poor friends sank with the setting sun last
evening.”

“Not to me be the praise--not to me,” said Wesley, bowing his head in
all humility. After a few moments he raised his head quite suddenly,
saying:

“You have referred to my judgment, dear friend; I wonder if you think
that in many matters my judgment is worthy to be depended on?”

“Indeed, sir, I know of no man in the world whose judgment in all
reasonable matters I would accept sooner than yours,” replied Hartwell.
“Why, Mr. Wesley, who save you would have foreseen a way of avoiding the
trouble which threatened us by such means as you adopted? Were not
we all looking for you to administer a rebuke to the man whose vanity
carried him so far away from what we held to be discreet? Was there
one of us who foresaw that the right way of treating him was to let him
alone?”

“I dare not say that 'twas my own judgment that guided me,” said Wesley.
“But--I hope, friend Hartwell, that I shall never be led to take any
step that will jeopardise your good opinion of my capacity to judge what
course is the right one to pursue in certain circumstances.”

“Believe me, Mr. Wesley, after the events of yesterday I shall not
hesitate to say that you were in the right and I in the wrong, should I
ever be disposed to differ from you on a matter of moment. But I cannot
think such a difference possible to arrive,” said Hartwell.

“Differences in judgment are always possible among good friends,” said
Wesley.

“I should like to have a long talk with you some day, Mr. Wesley, on
the subject of the influence of such powers as are at the command of
Pritchard,” said Hartwell. “Are they the result of sorcery or are they a
gift from above? I have been thinking a great deal about that trance of
his which we witnessed. How was it possible for him to foresee the place
and the form of that wreck, think you?”

“Howsoever his powers be derived,” replied Wesley, “the lesson that we
must learn from his case is that we cannot be too careful in choosing
our associates. For myself, I have already said that I mistrusted him
from the first, as I should any man practising with a divining rod.”

“We should have done so, too, sir, only that we had become so accustomed
to his water-finding, it seemed as natural to send for him when sinking
a well as it was to send for the mason to build the wall round it when
the water was found.”

This was all that they said at that time touching the remarkable
incidents of the week. Both of them seemed to regard the case of
Pritchard as closed, although they were only in the morning of the day
which the man had named in his prediction. Mr. Hartwell even assumed
that his guest would be anxious to set out on his return to the west
before noon, and he was gratified when Wesley asked for leave to stay on
for a day or two yet.

Wesley spent an hour or two over his correspondence, and all the time
the matter which he had at heart caused him to lay down his pen and lie
back in his chair, thinking, not upon the subject of his letters, but
upon the question of approaching Nelly Polwhele, and upon the question
of the letter which he would have to write to his brother when he had
seen the girl; for whether she accepted him or refused him, he felt that
it was his duty to inform his brother as to what had occurred.

The result of his meditations was as might have been expected. When a
man who is no longer young gives himself up to consider the advisability
of offering marriage to a young woman with whom he has not been in
communication for much more than a month, he usually procrastinates in
regard to the deciding scene. Wesley felt that perhaps he had been too
hasty in coming to the conclusion that a marriage with Nelly would bring
happiness to them both. Only a few hours had elapsed since he had, as he
thought, made up his mind that he loved her. Should he not refrain from
acting on such an impulse? What would be the consequence if he were to
ask the young woman to be his wife and find out after a time that he
should not have been so sure of himself? Surely so serious a step as
he was contemplating should be taken with the utmost deliberation. He
should put himself to the test. Although he had been looking forward to
seeing the girl this day, he would not see her until the next day--nay,
he was not confident that he might not perceive that his duty lay in
waiting for several days before approaching her with his offer.

That was why, when he left the house to take the air, he walked, not
in the direction of the village, where he should run the best chance of
meeting her, but toward the cliffs, which were usually deserted on week
days, except by the Squire's grooms, who exercised the horses in their
charge upon the fine dry sand that formed a large plateau between the
pathway and the struggling trees on the outskirts of Court Park.

He went musing along the cliff way, thinking of the contrast between
this day and the previous one--of the contrast between those sparkling
waves that tossed over each other in lazy play, and the slime and ooze
which had lain bare and horrid with their suggestions of destruction
and disaster. It was a day such as one could scarcely have dreamt of
following so sinister a sunset as he had watched from this place. It was
a day that made him glad that he had not uttered a harsh word in rebuke
of the man who had troubled him--indeed he felt most kindly disposed
toward Pritchard; he was certainly ready to forgive him for having been
the means of bringing him, Wesley, back to this neighbourhood.

He wondered if it had not been for Pritchard, would he have returned to
Ruthallion and Porthawn. Was the affection for Nelly, of which he had
become conscious during his journeying in the west, strong enough at
that time to carry him back to Porthawn, or had it matured only since he
had come back to her?

He wondered and mused, strolling along the path above the blue Cornish
waters. Once as he stood for a while, his eyes looked longingly in the
direction of the little port. He felt impatient for more than a few
moments--impatient that he should be so strict a disciplinarian in
regard to himself. It was with a sigh he turned away from where the
roofs of the nearest houses could just be seen, and resumed his stroll
with unfaltering feet. He had made his resolution and he would keep to
it.

But he did not get further than that little dip in the cliffs where he
had once slept and awakened to find Nelly Polwhele standing beside him.
The spot had a pleasant memory for him. He remembered how he had been
weary when he had lain down there, and how he had risen up refreshed.

Surely he must have loved her even then, he thought. What, was it
possible that he had known her but a few days at that time? His
recollection of her coming to him was as that of someone to whom he had
been attached for years.

He smiled as he recalled the tale which he had once read of the magician
Merlin, who had woven a bed of rushes for the wife of King Mark, on
which she had but to lie and forthwith she saw whomsoever she wished to
see. Well, here he was in the land of King Mark of Cornwall, and there
was the place where he had made his bed....

He had been contemplating the comfortable hollow between the rocks,
thinking his thoughts, and he did not raise his eyes for some time. When
he did he saw Nelly Polwhele coming toward him, not along the cliffs,
but across the breadth of moorland beyond which was the Court Park.




CHAPTER XXI

Tis by a happy chance we are brought together,” Wesley said while he
held her hand.

But Nelly Polwhele made haste to assure him that it was not by chance;
she had been with her young ladies at the Court, she said, and from
the high ground she had spied upon him on his walk, and had come to him
through the sparse hedges of the park.

He smiled at the eagerness with which she disclaimed such an ally as
chance. He had not had a wide experience of young women, but he had a
shrewd conviction that the greater number of them would have hastened to
acknowledge his suggestion rather than to repudiate it. She was innocent
as a child.

“By whatsoever means we have been brought together, I for one must think
it happy,” said he. “Do you go to your friends yonder every day?”

“Oh, no, sir; but they have charged me to keep them apprised of your
preaching since you came hither, and thus I went to them yesterday--that
was after your morning preaching--and to-day to tell them of the
evening. Oh, sir, surely there was never aught seen that would compare
with the happenings of yester eve! Even while I was rehearsing all to my
young ladies, I had a feeling that I was telling them what I had seen
in a dream. I do think that I have had a dream more than once that was
strangely like all that was before my eyes--a dream of drowning and
seeing in a blood-red light the mysteries of the sea-bed.”

“A strange thing, my child! I have never seen a stranger thing,” said
he. “It did not seem a wonder to me that the people were so agitated.”

“They thought for sure that the end of the world had come,” said she.
“And indeed I began to feel that poor Dick Pritchard had truly been sent
to warn us.”

“And how was his warning taken by many?” he cried. “Worse than the
Ninevites were some that I saw here. Of sackcloth there was none on
their limbs--of repentance their hearts were empty. I hope, my child,
that you did not see some of those whom I saw here--dancing--wild--pagan
creatures of the woods! And their dance! Pagan of the worst--an orgy of
the festival of the god Saturn--an abomination of Baal and Ashtoreth.
And I asked myself, 'Is it possible that this is how a solemn warning of
the coming of the Dreadful Day is taken by a Christian people? But you,
I trust, did not see all that came before me?”

“I saw enough to tell me that Dick Pritchard's warning was not a true
one,” said she. “I was by the side of father below the wreck. He had
seen the _Gloriana_ founder, and if Dick Pritchard had prophesied that
he should live to look upon her hull again after all the years that have
passed, he would have laughed. And some of the men about us on the beach
that had never been bare of water since the world began, talked like
wild men. If the world was to come to an end before another set o' sun
they meant to enjoy themselves--the Court--they whispered of breaking
through the doors of the Court and feasting for once and for the last
time. One of them--David Cairns is his name--cried that at the
Day of Judgment all men were equal, and he would head any band of
fellows that had the spirit to face the Squire and call for the key of
the cellar. Father called him a rascal, and he replied. Some were taking
his part and some the part of father, when the cry went up that Mr.
Wesley was nigh. That was the end of the strife, sir.”

“To tell me this last is to gladden my heart, my dear,” he said, and
again he clasped one of her hands in both his own. But he did not do so
with the fervour of a lover. His heart was not dwelling upon the purpose
which he had been considering since he rose; the girl's story had
absorbed him. “And now I hope that the good folk will settle down once
more into their quiet and useful lives,” he added.

“They will not be able to do so for some time,” she replied, shaking her
head. “All who were present at the preaching have already returned to
their work; the boats that were idle for nearly a week put out to the
fishing early in the morning; but there are other places where Dick
Pritchard's talk was heard, and the miners made it a good excuse for
quitting their labour.”

“Poor fellows, I shall go among them at once; I may be able to help
them,” said he.

“Do you think of going at once, sir?” she asked quickly.

“At once,” he replied. “Is there any time to lose?”

“And you will not return to us?”

Her question came from her like a sigh--a sigh that is quickly followed
by a sob.

He looked at her for some moments in silence. He had a thought that if
he meant to tell her that he loved her, no better opportunity would be
likely to present itself. This was for the first few moments, but his
thought was succeeded by a feeling that it would be a cruelty to shock
this innocent prattling child with his confession. She could not be
otherwise than shocked were he to tell her that his desire was to get
her promise to marry him. He would adhere to his resolution to wait. He
would make another opportunity if one did not present itself.

“If it be God's will I shall return to you,” he said. “Yes, in good
time--in good time.”

“I am glad,” she said. “It was because I feared that you would go away
at once and not return for a long time, that I made haste to reach you
when I saw you from the park.”

“Why should my going affect you, Nelly?” he asked. He wondered if the
opportunity which he looked for, and yet was anxious to avoid, would
persist in remaining within easy reach.

“I--I--the truth is, sir, that I wanted--I wished greatly--to ask your
advice,” she said.

“I hope you will not find that you have placed overmuch dependence on
me,” he said. “Let us walk along the cliffs and talk as we pursue our
way. Not that I am anxious to leave this spot; it bears many happy
memories to me. Was it not here that you came to me on the day of my
first preaching, ministering to my needs?”

She flushed with pleasure.

“Ah, sir, all I did was as nothing compared with the good that has come
to me through your words. I want your counsel now. I am sometimes very
unhappy by reason of my doubts in a matter on which I should have none.”

“Tell me your grief, dear child. Have you not lived long enough to know
that when the cause of your unhappiness is told to another, it weighs
less heavily upon you? What, did you not confide in me on Saturday? 'Tis
surely not from that man Bennet that----”

“Oh, no; he has naught to do with my trouble. It comes not from anyone
but my own self--from my own foolishness. You have a mind to hear the
story of a young girl's foolishness who knew not her own mind--her own
heart?”

“If you are quite sure that you wish to tell it to me. You may be
assured that you will find in me a sympathetic listener. Is there any
one of us that can say in truth that his heart or hers has not some time
been guilty of foolishness?”

“The worst of it is that what seems foolishness to-day had the semblance
of wisdom yesterday. And who can say that to-morrow we may not go back
to our former judgment?”

“That is the knowledge that has come to you from experience.”

“It has come to me as the conclusion of my story--such as it is.”

“'Tis sad to think that our best teacher must ever be experience, my
child. But if you have learned your lesson you should be accounted
fortunate. There are many to whom experience comes only to be neglected
as a teacher.”

“I have had experience--a little--and all that it has taught to me is
to doubt. A year ago I thought that I loved a man. To-day I do not know
whether I love him or not--that is all my poor story, sir.” She had not
spoken fluently, but faltering--with many pauses--a little wistfully,
and with her eyes on the ground.

He stopped suddenly in his walk. He, too, had his eyes upon the ground.
He had not at once appreciated the meaning of her words, but after a
pause it came upon him: he understood what her words meant to him.

She loved another man.

How could he ever have been so foolish as to take it for granted that
such a girl as this was free? That was the first thought which came to
him. Had he not heard how every youth for miles round was in love with
Nelly Polwhele? Had he not seen how one man had almost lost his senses
through love of her?

And yet he had been considering the question of asking her to marry
him, assuming from the very first that she must be free! He had been
considering the matter from his own standpoint, asking himself if it
would not be well to be assured of his own love for her before telling
her that he loved her; and he came to the conclusion that he should
not use any undue haste in saying the words which, he hoped, would link
their lives together. He had never entertained a suspicion that he might
be too late in making his appeal to her. It was now a shock to him to
learn, as he had just done, that he was too late.

It took him some time to recover himself.

“I ask your pardon,” he said. “I pray you to tell to me again what you
have just said.”

“I am well-nigh ashamed to say it, sir,” she murmured. “I am afraid that
you may not think well of me. You may think that there is some truth in
the reports that have gone abroad concerning me.”

“Reports? I have heard no reports. I thought of you as I found you,
and all that I thought was good. I think nothing of you now that is not
good. Ah, child, you do not know what direction my thoughts of you have
taken! Alas! alas!”

It was her turn to be startled. He saw the effect that his words had
produced upon her, and he hastened to modify it. He felt that he had no
right to say a word that might even in a distant way suggest to her the
direction in which his thoughts--his hopes--had so recently led him.

“Have I spoken too vaguely?” he said. “Surely not. But I will be
explicit, and assure you that from the day we walked through the valley
side by side I have thought of you as a good daughter--an honest and
innocent young woman, thoughtful for the well-being of others.”

“Oh, sir, your good opinion is everything to me!” she cried. “But I
feel that I have not earned it truly. Vanity has ever been my besetting
sin--vanity and fickleness. That is what I have to confess to you now
before asking you for your counsel.”

“God forbid that I should give you any counsel except that which I am
assured must be for your own well-being. Tell me all that is weighing on
your heart, and, God helping me, I will try to help you.”

“I will tell you all--all that I may tell, sir.'Tis not much to tell,
but it means a great deal to me. In brief, Mr. Wesley, a year ago I was
at Bristol and there I met a worthy man, who asked me to marry him. I
felt then that I loved him so truly that 'twould be impossible for me
ever to change, and so I gave him my promise. I had been ofttimes wooed
before, but because my heart had never been touched the neighbours all
affirmed that I had the hardest heart of any maiden in the Port. They
may have been right; but, hard-hearted or not, I believed that I loved
this man, and he sailed away satisfied that I would be true to him.”

“He was a mariner?”

“He is a master-mariner, and his ship is a fine one. He sailed for the
China Seas, and 'twas agreed that after his long voyage we were to be
married. That was, I say, a year ago, and I was true to him until----”

She faltered, she gave him a look that he could not understand, and then
all at once she flung herself down on the short coarse herbage of the
cliff, and began to weep with her hands over her face.

He strove to soothe her and comfort her, saying she had done naught
that was wrong--giving her assurance that a way out of her trouble would
surely he found if she told him all.

“What am I to do?” she cried, looking piteously up to him, with shining
eyes. “What am I to do? I got a letter from him only on Friday last,
telling me that he had had a prosperous voyage and had just brought his
ship safe to Bristol, and that he meant to come to me without delay. Oh,
sir, 'twas only when I had that letter I found that I no longer loved him
as I did a year ago.”

“Is there another man who has come between you, my child?” he asked
gravely.

“Heaven help me! there is another,” she faltered.

“And does he know that you are bound by a promise to someone else? If
so, believe me he is a dishonourable man, and you must dismiss him from
your thought,” said he.

She shook her head.

“He is an honourable man; he has never said a word of love to me. He
knows nothing of my love for him. He at least is innocent.”

“If he be indeed a true man he would, I know, give you counsel which I
now offer to you; even if he suspected--and I cannot but think that
if he sees you and converses with you, no matter how seldom, he will
suspect--the sad truth--he will leave your side and so give you an
opportunity of forgetting him, and all may be well.”

“Ah, sir, think you that 'tis so easy to forget?”

“Have you not just given me an instance of it, Nelly? But no; I will not
think that you have forgotten the one to whom you gave your promise.
I like rather to believe that that affection remains unchanged in your
heart, although it be for a while obscured. You remember how we lost our
way on the morning of yesterday? We saw not the shore; 'twas wreathed in
mist; but the solid shore was here all the same, and in another hour a
break dispersed the mist which up till then had been much more real to
us than the shore; the mist once gone, we saw the substance where we had
seen the shadow. Ah, dear child, how often is not the shadow of a love
taken for the true--the abiding love itself. Now dry your tears and tell
me when you expect your true lover to come to you.”

“He may arrive at any time. He will come by the first vessel that leaves
Bristol river. He must have left already. Oh, that sail out there may be
carrying him hither--that sail----”

She stopped suddenly, and made a shade of one hand over her eyes while
she gazed seaward. After a few moments of gazing she sprang to her feet
crying:

“The boats--you see them out there? What has happened that they are
flying for the shore? They should not be returning until the night.”

He looked out across the waters and saw the whole fleet of fishing
smacks making for the shore with every sail spread.

“Perhaps the boats have been unusually successful and thus have no need
to tarry on the fishing ground,” he suggested.

She remained with her eyes upon them for a long time. A look of
bewilderment was upon her face while she cried:

“Oh, everything is topsy-turvy in these days! Never have I known all the
boats to make for the shore in such fashion, unless a great storm was to
windward, and yet now----”

She caught him by the arm suddenly after she had remained peering out to
the southern horizon with an arched hand over her eyes.

“Look there--there!” she said in a whisper, pointing seaward. “Tell me
what you see there. I misdoubt my own eyes. Is there a line of white
just under the sky?”

He followed the direction of her finger. For some moments he failed
to see anything out of the common; the sea horizon was somewhat
blurred--that was all. But suddenly there came a gleam as of the sun
quivering upon a thin sword blade of white steel out there--it quivered
as might a feather in the wind.

“'Tis a white wave,” he said. “See, it has already widened. A great wave
rolling shoreward.”

“List, list,” she whispered.

He put his hand behind his ear. There came through the air the hollow
boom of distant thunder, or was it the breaking of a heavy sea upon a
rocky coast? The sound of many waters came fitfully landward, and at the
same moment a fierce gust of wind rushed over the water--they marked its
footsteps--it was stamping with the hoofs of a war-horse on the surface
of the deep as it charged down upon the coast.

Before the two persons on the cliff felt it on their faces, bending
their bodies against its force, a wisp of mist had come over the sun.
Far away there was a black cloud--small, but it looked to be dense as a
cannon ball. She pointed it out, and these were her words:

“A cannon ball!--a cannon ball!”

The gust of wind had passed; they could hear the trees of the park
complaining at first and then roaring, with the creaking of branches as
it clove its way through them. Flocks of sea birds filled the air--all
were flying inland. Their fitful cries came in all notes, from the
plaintive whistle of the curlew and the hoarse shriek of the gull to the
bass boom of a bittern.

Then the cannon ball cloud seemed to break into pieces in a flame of
blue fire, more dazzling than any lightning that ever flashed from
heaven to earth, and at the same instant the sun was blotted out, though
no cloud had been seen approaching it; the pall seemed to have dropped
over the disc, not to have crept up to it.

“A storm is on us,” he said. “Whither can we fly for shelter?”

“The stones of Red Tor,” she replied; “that is the nearest place. There
is plenty of shelter among the stones.”

“Come,” he cried, “there is no moment to be lost. Never have I known a
storm fall so quickly.”

She was tarrying on the cliff brow watching the progress of the fishing
boats.

“They will be in safety before disaster can overtake them,” she said.

Then she turned to hasten inland with him; but a sound that seemed to
wedge its way, so to speak, through the long low boom, with scarcely a
quiver in it, of the distant thunder, made her look round.

She cried out, her finger pointing to a white splash under the very
blackness of the cloud that now covered half the hollow of the sky dome
with lead.

“Never have I seen the like save only once, while the great gale was
upon us returning from Georgia,” said he. “'Tis a waterspout.”

It was a small spiral that came whirling along the surface of the water
whence it had sprung, and it made a loud hissing sound, with the swish
of broken water in it. It varied in height from three feet to twenty,
until it had become a thick pillar of molten glass, with branching
capitals that broke into flakes of sea-foam spinning into the drift.
Its path through the sea was like the scythe-sweep of a hurricane on
the shore. Its wake was churned up like white curd, and great waves fled
from beneath its feet.

Wesley and his companion stood in astonishment, watching that wonder.
Its course was not directly for the cliff where they were standing; but
they saw that if it reached the shore it would do so a hundred yards or
thereabouts to the westward.

They were not wrong. It reached the shore not farther away from them.
It struck the sand where the sun had dried it, and in a moment it had
scooped out a hollow eight or ten feet deep; then it whirled on to the
shingle. They heard the noise as of the relapse of a great wave among
the pebbles, sweeping them down beneath the scoop of its talons; only
now it seemed as if the prow of a frigate had dashed into the ridge of
pebbles and was pounding its way through them. It was a moving pillar
of stones that struck furiously against the stones of the cliff--an
avalanche in the air that thundered against the brow, breaking away
a ton of rock, and turning it into an avalanche that slid down to the
enormous gap made in the shingle. At the same instant there was the roar
of a cataract as the whirling flood of the waterspout broke high in the
air and dropped upon the land. It was as if a lake had fallen from the
skies in a solid mass, carrying everything before it.

It was the girl who had grasped Wesley by the arm, forcing him to
rush with her to the higher ground. Together they ran; but before they
reached it they were wading and slipping and surging through a torrent
that overflowed the cliff, and poured in the wave of a waterfall over
the brink and thundered upon the rocks beneath.

They only paused to take breath when they reached the highest ledge of
the irregular ground beyond the cliff pathway. There was a tangle
of lightning in the air--it fell from a cloud that had black flowing
fringes, like a horse's tail trailing behind it, and it was approaching
the shore. They fled for the rocks of the Bed Tor.

If he had been alone he never would have reached the place. The air was
black with rain, and he and his companion seemed to be rushing through
a cloud that had the density of velvet. It was a blind flight; but this
girl of the coast needed not the lightning torch that flared on every
side of them to guide her. She held his arm, and he suffered himself
to be led by her. She even knew where the sheltering rocks were to
be found; they had not to search for them. At the back of the slight
eminence that had formed his pulpit, half a dozen basalt boulders of
unequal size lay tumbled together. Two of them were on end and three
others lay over them, the remaining one lying diagonally across the
arched entrance to what had the appearance of the ruin of a doorway four
feet high. The high coarse herbage of the place, with here and there
a bramble branch, was thick at this place, and if the girl and the
companions of her childhood had not been accustomed to play their games
here, calling the hollow between the stones their cave sometimes, their
palace when it suited them, it would have escaped notice.

She bent her head and crept under the stones of the roof, and he
followed her. They had a depth of scarcely three feet behind them, for
the bank of the mound against which the stones lay sloped naturally
outward, and the height was not more than four feet; but it was a
shelter, although they had to kneel upon its hard floor. It was a
shelter, and they had need of one just then. The cloud had burst over
them just as they reached their hospitable cleft in the rocks, and the
seventh plague of Egypt had fallen upon the rude amphitheatre of the
Red Tor--it was hail mingled with fire; and when a pause came, as it
did with a suddenness that was more appalling than the violence of the
storm, the ninth plague was upon them. The darkness might have been
felt. They could see nothing outside. They knew that only ten yards away
there was another pile of rocks with a few stunted trees springing from
their crevices; but they could not even see this landmark. Farther away,
on a small plateau, was the celebrated rocking-stone of Red Tor; but it
seemed to have been blotted out. They could hear the sound of the wind
shrieking over the land, making many strange whistlings and moanings
through the hollows among the stones--they could hear the sound of
thousands of runnels down the banks, but they could see nothing.

In that awful black pause Wesley began to repeat the words of the
eighteenth Psalm:

“The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my
strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and my high tower....

“In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard
my voice out of his temple, and my cry before him, even into his ears.

“Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills
moved and were shaken, because he was wroth.

“There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured: coals were kindled by it.

“He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his
feet.

“And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings
of the wind.

“He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were
dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.

“At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail
stones and coals of fire.

“The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice;
hail stones and coals of fire.

“Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out
lightnings, and discomfited them.

“Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world
were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils....

“For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my
darkness.”

Before he had come to the last stanza the battle of the elements had
followed the brief truce.

The first flash was blinding, but before they had instinctively put
their hands up to their eyes they had seen every twig of the skeleton
trees outlined against the background of fire--they had seen the black
bulk of the rocking-stone, and for the first time they noticed that
it had the semblance of a huge hungry beast crouching for a leap. The
thunder that followed seemed to set the world shaking with the sway of
the rocking-stone when someone had put it in motion.

“Is it true?--is it, indeed, true?” cried the girl between the peals of
thunder. He felt her hands tighten upon his arm.

“The Rock of Ages is true,” he said; but the second peal swallowed up
his words.

He heard her voice when the next flash made a cleft in the cloud:

“Is it true--the prophecy--has it come?”

Then he knew what was in her mind.

“Do you fear it?” he cried, and he turned his face toward her. Another
flaring sword made its stroke from the heavens, and by its blaze he saw
that she was smiling while she shook her head.

He knew that she had no fear. Across his own mind there had flashed the
same thought that had come to her, taking the form of the question which
she had put to him: “Is the prophecy about to be realised?”

He felt perfectly tranquil in the midst of the storm; and the reflection
that the tranquillity of the girl was due to his influence was sweet to
him. The roar of the thunder had become almost continuous. They seemed
to be the centre of a circle of livid flame. The intervals of darkness
were less numerous than those during which the whole sky became
illuminated. The floods came rather more fitfully. For a few minutes at
a time it seemed as if an ocean had been displaced, as if an ocean had
been suspended above them, and then suddenly dropped with the crash of a
waterfall. Immediately afterward there would be a complete cessation of
rain and the crash of waters. The thunder sounded very lonely.

More than once there were intervals of sudden clearness in the air. For
minutes at a time they could see, even after the blinding flash of a
javelin of lightning, every object outside their sheltering place; then
suddenly all would be blotted out. At such moments it seemed as if the
blackness above them was solid--a vast mountain of unhewn marble falling
down upon them. They had the impression of feeling the awful weight of
its mass beginning to crush them. They became breathless--gasping.

Once a flash fell close to them, and there was a noise of splintering
wood and the hiss of water into which a red-hot bar has been dipped.
A second afterward a blazing brand was flung in front of them, and the
smoke hung dense in the heavy air. By the light that was cast around
they saw that one of the trees growing on the little mound close to them
had been struck and hurled where it lay.

It blazed high for a few minutes, and then the girl cried out. She had
got upon her feet, though forced to keep her head bent. He thought that
she was pointing out to him the thing that had happened; but in a moment
he perceived that her eyes were fixed upon some object beyond the mound
that had been struck. It was, however, only when the next flash came
that he saw out there the figure of a man--he recognised him: it was
Pritchard.

He stood bareheaded with his sackcloth garment clinging to him--the
lightning was reflected from it as if it had been made of steel, for the
water was streaming down its folds--on the summit of the rocks that were
piled together on the slope of the bank not twenty yards away. He was
gesticulating, but his bare arms were above his head.

So much Wesley saw in the single glimpse that was allowed to him. After
the flash the darkness swallowed him up once more; but even before the
next flash came he was visible, though faintly, by the light of the
blazing tree, for the trunk had not fallen directly between where he
was standing and the shelter. The red light flickered over his body, and
showed his attitude--his hands were now clasped over his head, and he
was facing the quarter whence the storm was coming. Then there fell
another torrent of rain and hail, and he was hidden by that watery sheet
for some minutes. Suddenly, as before, the rain ceased, and there was
another interval of clearness, that showed him standing with his arms
extended. And when the thunder peal rolled away his voice was heard
calling out passionately, though his words were indistinct; they were
smothered in the noise of the thousand torrents of the Tor.

In a moment Wesley had pushed himself through the opening of his shelter
and hurried to his side. He caught him by the arm.

“Come!” he cried. “Have you not read, 'Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy
God'? Man! is this a time to seek destruction?”

The man turned upon him.

“It has come--it has come--the great and terrible Day, and I am its
prophet!” he shouted. “You did not believe me. I was mocked more than
any prophet; but it has come. All has been fulfilled, except calling
to the rocks and the mountains. No voice has called to them but mine.
I have called to the rocks to cover me and the hills to hide, but none
else. But you will join me--you will add your voice to mine that the
Scriptures may be fulfilled, John Wesley. Call upon them as I do. Fall
upon us, O rocks--cover us, O hills!”

He stretched out his arms once more and bowed his head on every side,
shouting out his words, amid the blaze of the lightning and the rattle
of the thunder.

“Wretch!” cried Wesley, but then he checked himself. He had now no doubt
that the man had become a maniac. “My poor friend--brother--let me be
your guide at this time. Let us talk over the matter together. There is
a place of safety at hand.”

“What, you, John Wesley, talk of safety; know you not in this dread hour
that the Scripture must be fulfilled?” shouted the man. “What will your
judgment be who would make the Holy Writ to be a vain thing? I tell you,
sir, that it will be a lie if you do not join with me in calling
upon the rocks to fall upon us? This is the place that was prophesied
of--these are the very rocks--yonder are the very hills. They will not
move--they must be stubborn until another voice be joined with mine. O
rocks, fall--fall--fall!”

Wesley grasped one of the frantic arms that were outstretched. He could
not temporise with the wretch again.

“You shall not dare!” he cried. “I may not stand by and hear such a
mockery.”

The man wrenched his arm free.

“The mockery is yours, sir,” he shouted. “You will not save the truth
of the Scriptures when it is left for you to do so. Think of your own
condemnation, man--think that there are only two of us here, and if we
remain silent we are guilty of blasphemy, for we are preventing the
fulfilment of this prophecy.”

A discharge of lightning that had the semblance of a pair of fiery
fetters went from hill to hill, and when Wesley recovered the use of his
eyes he saw that the man was pointing to the slight eminence on which
the rocking-stone was poised.

“It has been shown to me--thank God that it has been shown to me before
'tis too late,” he cried. “If you, John Wesley, refuse to aid me, power
shall be given me alone to fulfil the Scriptures. The rocks shall obey
me. I am the chosen vessel.”

A torrent of rain swept between them, with the sound of a huge wave
striking upon the flat face of a cliff. Wesley spread out his arms. One
of them was grasped by the girl, who had crept to his side, and he felt
himself guided back to the shelter.

He lay back upon the sloping rock thoroughly exhausted, and closed his
eyes.

A minute had passed before he opened them again, hearing the girl cry
out.

Another of the comparatively clear intervals had come, and it was
sufficient to show the great rocking-stone in motion and the figure that
was swaying it. To and fro it went on its heels' keel, the man making
frantic efforts to increase the depth to which it rose and fell. To
and fro, to and fro it swayed, and every fall was deeper than the last,
until at last it was swinging so that the side almost touched the rock
beyond. The man thrust his shoulder beneath the shoulder of the moving
mass of stone, pushing it back every time it bowed toward him. Never
before had it swung like this. At last it staggered on to the edge of
the cup on which it was poised--staggered, but recovered itself and
slipped into its place again. It swung back and jerked out of the cup as
before. One more swing, with the man flinging his whole weight upon it;
for a second it trembled on the edge of the hollow fulcrum, and then--it
failed to return. It toppled slowly over upon the granite rock. For
a moment its descent was retarded by the man, who was crushed like a
walnut beneath it, then with a crash of broken crags it fell over the
brink of the height to the ground, fifteen feet beneath.

Wesley left the girl with her hands pressed against her eyes and hurried
to the fallen mass. A man's hand projected from beneath it--nothing
more. But for this it would have been impossible to say that a body was
beneath it. The mighty stone did not even lie flat on the ground; it had
made a hollow for itself in the soft earth. It had buried itself to the
depth of a foot, and beneath its base Pritchard lay buried.




CHAPTER XXII

Not until the afternoon had the storm moderated sufficiently to allow
of Wesley and his companion returning to Porthawn. For a full hour after
the fall of the rocking-stone they remained together in the shelter.
They were both overcome by the horror of what they had witnessed.
Happily the charred crown of branches which remained on the tree that
had been struck down, after the rain had extinguished the blaze, was
enough to hide the fallen stone, and that ghastly white thing that lay
thrust out from beneath it like a splash of lichen frayed from the crag.
But for another hour the tempest continued, only with brief intervals,
when a dense and smoky greyness took the place of the blackness. It
seemed as if the storm could not escape from the boundary of the natural
amphitheatre in the centre of which was the mound which Wesley had used
as his pulpit; and to that man whose imagination was never a moment
inactive, the whole scene suggested a picture which he had once seen of
the struggle of a thousand demons of the Pit, around a sanctified place,
for the souls of those who were safe within the enclosure. There were
the swirling black clouds every one of which let loose a fiery flying
bolt, while the winds yelled horribly as any fiends that might be
struggling with obscene tooth and claw, to crush the souls that were
within the sacred circle. The picture had, he knew, been an allegory; he
wondered if it were not possible that certain scenes in Nature might be
equally allegorical. He hoped that he was not offending when he thought
of this citadel of his faith--this pulpit from which he had first
preached in Cornwall--being assailed by the emissaries of the
Arch-enemy, and jet remaining unmoved as a tower built to withstand
every assault of the foe.

The whole scene assumed in his imagination a series of fierce assaults,
in all of which the enemy was worsted and sent flying over the plain; he
could hear the shrieks of the disappointed fiends--the long wail of the
wounded that followed every impulse; and then, after a brief interval,
there came the renewed assault--the circling tumult seeking for a
vulnerable point of entrance. But there it stood, that pulpit from whose
height he had preached the Gospel to the thousands who had come to hear
him, and had gone forth to join the forces that are evermore at conflict
with the powers of evil in the world, There stood his pulpit unmoved in
the midst of the tumult. He accepted the symbolism, and he was lifted
up by the hope that his work sent forth from this place would live
untouched by the many conflicts of time.

He was able to speak encouraging words to his companion every time
the thunder passed away; and he was more than ever conscious of the
happiness of having her near to him at this time. He knew that he had
loved her truly; for his love had been true enough and strong enough to
compel him to give her the advice that precluded his ever being able
to tell her of his own feeling for her. The joy of her gracious
companionship was not for him; but he would do all that in him lay to
assure her happiness.

He knew that he was able to soothe her now that she had received a shock
that would have been too much for most women. The horror of the mode of
the man's death, quite apart from the terror of the tempest, was enough
to prostrate any ordinary man or woman. It was very sweet to him to feel
her cling to his arm when they crawled back to their shelter. He laid
his hand tenderly upon the hand that clasped him, and he refrained from
saying a word to her at that moment. When the storm had moderated in
some measure he spoke to her; and he was too wise to make any attempt
to turn her thoughts from the tragedy which, he knew, could not possibly
fade from her mind even with the lapse of years.

“He predicted truly so far as he himself was concerned,” he said
gravely. “The end came for him as he said. Poor wretch! He may have
possessed all his life a curious sense beyond that allowed to others--an
instinct--it may not have been finer than the instinct of a bird. I have
read that one of the desert birds will fly an hundred miles to where
a camel has fallen by the way. The camel itself has, we are told, an
instinct that guides it to water. But I do not say that he was not an
agent of evil. There is evidence to prove that sorcery can give the
power to predict what seems to be the truth, but it is only a juggling
of the actual truth. The manner of that poor wretch's death makes one
feel suspicious. He predicted the end of the world; well, the world came
to an end, so far as he was concerned. You perceive the jugglery? But
his was a weak mind. He may have been lured on to his own destruction.
However this may be, his end was a terrible one. I grieve that it was
left for us to witness it.”

She shook her head.

“I shall never forget to-day,” she said. “I had a feeling more than
once when the lightning was brighter than common, and the world seemed
to shake under the rattle of the thunderclap, that the next moment would
be the last.”

“There was no terror on your face--I saw it once under the fiercest
flash,” said he.

“At first--ah, I scarce know how I felt,” said she. “But when I heard
your words saying, 'Rock of Ages,' my fear seemed to vanish.”

“The lines ring with the true confidence that only the true Rock of Ages
can inspire,” said he.

And thus he gradually led her thoughts away from the ghastly thing that
she had seen, though he had begun talking to her about it. At this time
the storm, which had been hurtling around the brim of the huge basin
of the valley, had succeeded in its Titanic efforts to free itself from
whatever influence it was held it fettered within the circle; and though
the rain continued, there was only an occasional roll of thunder. The
roar that now filled the valley was that of the sea. It came to them
after the storm like the voice of an old friend shouting to them to be
of good cheer.

And all that the preacher said to her was founded upon the text that the
sea shouted for them to hear. For a time at least the horror that she
had looked upon passed out of her mind; and when he pointed out to her
that the rain had almost ceased, she suffered herself to be led away
from their place of shelter by the further side of the central mound,
without straining her eyes to see where the rocking-stone lay; she
had not even a chance of noting the strangeness brought about by the
disappearance of a landmark that she had seen since she was a child. But
as they walked rapidly toward the little port, a cold fear took hold of
her.

“Can a single cottage remain after such a storm--can anyone be left
alive?” she cried, and he saw that the tears were on her face.

“Do not doubt it,” he said. “To doubt it were to doubt the goodness of
God. Some men are coming toward us. I have faith that they bring us good
news.”

Within a few minutes they saw that it was Mr. Hartwell and two of his
men who had come in search of Wesley. Before they met, Nelly had asked
how the port had fared--the boats, what of the boats?

“All's well,” was the response, and her hands clasped themselves in joy
and gratitude.

Never had such a tempest been thrown on the coast, Hartwell said, but
absolutely no damage had been done to building, boat, or human being.
Some trees had been struck by the lighting in the outskirts of the park,
and doubtless others had suffered further inland; but the fishing boats
having had signs of the approach of the storm, had at once made for
the shore, and happily were brought to the leeward of the little wharf
before the first burst had come.

When he had told his tale he enquired if either of them had seen
anything of Pritchard.

“He appeared suddenly where we saw him yesterday,” he continued, “and
his cry was that we should join him in calling upon the rocks to fall on
us. He would not be persuaded to take shelter, and he was seen to wander
into what seemed to be the very heart of the storm.”

Wesley shook his head, and told his story.

The man whose prophecy of the end of the world had spread within certain
limits a terror that was recalled by many firesides, and formed a
landmark in the annals of two generations, was the only one who perished
in the great thunderstorm, which undoubtedly took place within a day or
two of the date assigned by him to see the destruction of the world.

John Wesley had no choice left him in the matter. His host insisted on
his going into a bed that had been made as warm as his copper pan of
charcoal could make it, after partaking of a spiced posset compounded in
accordance with a recipe that was guaranteed to prevent the catching of
a cold, no matter how definitely circumstances conspired in favour of a
cold.

His garments had become sodden with rain from the waterspout at the
outset of the storm, and he had been forced to sit for several hours in
the same clothes. He could not hope to escape a cold unless by the help
of this famous posset, the housekeeper affirmed; and she was amazed to
find him absolutely docile in this matter. She had been voluble in her
entreaties; but she came to the conclusion that she might have spared
herself half her trouble; she had taken it for granted that she was
talking to an ordinary man, who would scoff at the virtues of her
posset, and then make all his friends miserable by his complaints when
he awoke with a cold on him. Mr. Wesley was the only sensible man she
had ever met, she declared to her master, with the sinister expression
of a hope that his example of docility would not be neglected by others.

He went to bed, and after listening for some hours to the roaring of
the sea, he fell asleep. The evening had scarcely come, but he had never
felt wearier in all his life.

He slept for eight hours, and when he awoke he knew that he had done
well to yield, without the need for persuasion, to the advice of the
housekeeper. He felt refreshed in every way; and after lying awake for
an hour, he arose, dressed himself, and left the house. This impulse to
take a midnight walk was by no means unusual with him. He had frequently
found himself the better for an hour or two spent in the darkness,
especially beside the sea. Midnight was just past. If he were to remain
in the air for some time, he might, he thought, be able to sleep until
breakfast-time.

The night was cool, without being cold, and there was a sweet freshness
in the air which had certainly been wanting when he had walked along the
cliffs in the afternoon. The thunderstorm did not seem at that time to
have cleared the atmosphere. He was rather surprised to find that there
was such a high sea rolling at this time, and he came to the conclusion
that there had been a gale while he was asleep. Clouds were still hiding
the sky, but they held no rain.

He shunned the cliff track, going in the opposite direction, which led
him past the village, and on to the steep sandy bay with its occasional
little peninsulas of high rocks, the surfaces of which were not covered
even by Spring tides. Very quiet the little port seemed at this
hour. Not a light was in any window--not a sound came from any of the
cottages. He stood for a long time on the little wharf looking at the
silent row of cottages. That one which had the rose-bush trained over
the porch was the home of the Polwheles, he knew, and he remained with
his eyes fixed upon it. It seemed as if this had been the object of his
walk--to stand thus in front of that house, as any youthful lover might
stand beneath the lattice that he loved.

He had his thoughts to think, and he found that this was the time to
think them. They were all about the girl who slept beyond that window.
He wondered if he had ever loved her before this moment. If he had
really loved her, how was it that he had never before been led to this
place to watch the house where she lay asleep? Was it possible that he
had fancied he knew her before he had passed those hours with her when
the storm was raging around them? He felt that without this experience
he could not possibly have known what manner of girl she was.

And now that he had come to know her the knowledge came to him with the
thought that she was not for him.

He had set out in the morning feeling that perhaps he had been too hasty
in coming to the conclusion that because, when far away from her he had
been thinking a great deal of his own loneliness and the joy that her
companionship would bring to him, he loved her. That was why he had
wished to put himself to the test, and he had fancied that he was doing
so when he had walked in the opposite direction to that in which the
village lay so that he might avoid the chance of meeting her.

But in spite of his elaborate precautions--he actually thought that
it had shown ingenuity on his part--he had met her, and he had learned
without putting the question to her that she was not for him. He
recalled what his feeling had been at that moment. He had fancied that
he knew all that her words meant to him; but he had deceived himself; it
was only now that he knew exactly the measure of what they meant to him.
It seemed to him that he had known nothing of the girl before he had
passed those dark hours by her side.

At that time it was as if all the world had been blotted out, only he
and she being left alone.

This feeling he now knew was what was meant by loving--this feeling that
there was nothing left in the world--that nothing mattered so long as he
and she were together--that death itself would be welcome if only it did
not sunder them.

And he had gained that knowledge only to know that they were to be
sundered.

It was a bitter thought, and for a time, as he stood there with his eyes
fixed upon the cottage, he felt as if so far as he was concerned the
world had come to an end. The happiness which he had seen before him as
plainly as if it had been a painted picture--a picture of the fireside
in the home that he hoped for--had been blotted out from before his
eyes, and in its stead there was a blank. It did not matter how that
blank might be filled in, it would never contain the picture that had
been torn away from before him when she had of her own free will told
him the story of her love.

He felt the worst that any man can feel, for the worst comes only when a
man cries out to himself:

“Too late--too late!”

He was tortured by that perpetual question of “Why? Why? Why?”

Why had he not come to Cornwall the previous year? Why had he not seen
her before she had gone to Bristol and given her promise to the other
man?

But this was only in the floodtide of his bitterness; after a space
it subsided. More reasonable thoughts came to him. Who was he that
he should rail against what had been ordered by that Heaven in whose
ordering of things he had often expressed his perfect faith? What would
he say of any man who should have such rebellious thoughts? Could this
be the true love--this that made him rebel against the decree of an
all-wise Providence? If it was true it would cause him to think not of
his own happiness, but of hers.

Had he been thinking all the time of his own happiness? he asked
himself. Had she been denied to him on this account? He feared that it
was so. He recalled how he had been thinking of her, and he had many
pangs of self-reproach when he remembered how in all the pictures of the
future that his imagination had drawn he was the central figure. He
felt that his aim had been an ignoble one. Selfishness had been the
foundation of his love, and therefore he deserved the punishment that
had fallen upon him.

'He continued his walk and went past the cottage on which his eyes had
lingered. For a mile he strolled, lost in thought along the sandy bay,
disturbing the sea birds that were wading about the shallow pools in
search of shell fish. The tide was on the ebb and he walked down the
little ridges of wet beach until he found himself at the edge of that
broad grey sea that sent its whispering ripples to his feet. He had
always liked to stand thus in winter as well as summer. Within an hour
of dawn the sea seemed very patient. It was waiting for what was to
come--for the uprising of the sun to turn its grey into gold.

He never failed to learn the lesson of the sea in all its moods; and now
he felt strengthened by looking out to the eastern sky, though it was
still devoid of light. He would have patience. He would wait and have
faith. Light was coming to the world, and happy was the one to whom was
given the mission of proclaiming that dawn--the coming of the Light of
the World.

Even when he resumed his stroll after he had looked across the dun
waters he became conscious of a change in the eastern sky. The clouds
that still clung to that quarter were taking on to themselves the pallor
of a pearl, and the sky edge of the sea was lined with the tender glaze
that appears on the inner surface of a white shell, and its influence
was felt upon the objects of the coast. The ridges of the peninsular
rocks glimmered, and the outline of the whole coast became faintly seen.
It was coming--the dawn for which the world was waiting was nigh. The
doubts born of the night were ready to fly away as that great heron
which rose in front of him fled with winnowing wings across the surface
of the sea.



CHAPTER XXIII

The first faint breath of the dawn--that sigh of light of which the air
was scarcely conscious--made him aware as he walked along the sands
of the fact that the beach was strewn with wreckage. He found himself
examining a broken spar upon which he had struck his foot. Further on he
stumbled over a hen-coop, and then again a fragment that looked like the
cover of a hatchway.

He had heard nothing about a vessel's having come ashore during the
tempest of the morning; but there was nothing remarkable in the sudden
appearing of wreckage on this wild Cornish coast. Almost every tide
washed up something that had once been part of a gallant ship. Wreckage
came without anyone hearing of the wreck from which it had come. He
examined the broken spar, and his fancy showed him the scene at the
foundering of such a ship as the _Gloriana_, whose carcase had been
so marvellously uncovered on the Sunday evening. He had had enough
experience of seafaring to be able to picture the details of the
wreckage of such a ship.

He left the beach and went on to the ascent of the higher part of the
shore, thinking that it might be that when the dawn strengthened it
might reveal the shape of some craft that had run ashore on the outer
reef at this dangerous part of the coast; and even before he reached the
elevated ground the dawn light had spread its faint gauze over the
sea, and the shapes of the rocks were plain. He looked out carefully,
scanning the whole coast, but he failed to see any wreck between the
horns of the bay.

But when he had continued his slow walk for a few hundred yards he
fancied that he saw some objects that looked dark against the pale
sands. At first he thought that he was looking at a rock that had some
resemblance to the form of a man; but a movement of a portion of the
object showed that it was indeed a man who was standing there.

Wesley had no mind for a companion on this stroll of his, so he went a
short way inland in order to save himself from being seen, and he did
not return to the sandy edge of the high ground until he judged that he
had gone beyond the spot where he had seen the man. Turning about, he
found that he had done what he intended: he saw the dark figure walking
from where he had been, in the direction of the sea.

But by this time the light had so increased that he was able to see that
the man was walking away from the body of another that was lying on the
beach.

He had scarcely noticed this before the man stopped, looked back, and
slowly returned to the body. But the moment he reached it Wesley was
amazed to see him throw up his arms as if in surprise and then fling
himself down on the body with his hands upon its throat.

Wesley knew nothing except that the man's attitude was that of one who
was trying to strangle another. But this was surely enough. He shouted
out and rushed toward the place with a menace.

The man was startled; his head went back with a jerk, but his hands did
not leave the other's throat. Wesley had to drag him back by the collar,
and even then he did not relax his hold until the body had been lifted
up into a sitting position. The moment the man's fingers were loosed the
head fell back upon the sand.

Wesley threw himself between the two, and the instant that he turned
upon the assailant he recognised John Bennet.

“Wretch!” he cried, “what is it that you would do? What is it that you
have done--murderer?”

Bennet stared at him as if stupefied. Then he burst into a laugh, but
stopped himself suddenly.

“Mr. Wesley, is it?” he cried. “Oh, sir, is't you indeed that pulls my
hands off his throat? There is something for the Devil to laugh at in
that.”

“Man, if you be a man and not a fiend, would you strangle one whom the
sea has already drowned?” cried Wesley.

“I have the right,” shouted Bennet, “for he would be dead by now if I
had not succoured him.”

“If it be true that you saved him from an imminent death, at that time,
wherefore should you strive to murder him now?” said Wesley.

“I did not see his face then--it was dark when I stumbled on him. Only
when I turned about when the dawn broke I saw who he was. Go your ways,
Mr. Wesley. The man is mine by every law of fair play. Stand not between
us, sir, or you shall suffer for it.”

“Monster, think you that I shall obey you while a breath remains in my
body? I shall withstand you to the death, John Bennet; you shall have
two murders laid at your door instead of one.”

The man laughed as before. Then he said:

“That is the point where the devils begin to laugh--ho! ho! John
Wesley!”

“I have heard one of them,” said Wesley.

“Oh, you fool, to stay my hand! Know you not that the man lying there is
none other than he whom Nelly Polwhele has promised to marry?”

“And is not that a sufficient reason why you should do your best to save
him--not take his life away?”

For more than a minute the man was too astonished to speak. At last he
said:

“Is it that you are mad, John Wesley? Heard you not what I said?”

“Every word,” replied Wesley.

“You cannot have taken in my words,” the other whispered. “Think, sir,
that is the foolish thing that stands between you and her--you love
her--I have seen that.”

[Illustration: 0293]

“And I stand between you and him--that is enough for the present
moment,” said Wesley quickly, facing the man, whom he noticed sidling
round ready to leap upon the body lying on the beach.

Bennet saw that his cunning was overmatched. “Fool! I cry again,” he
said in a low tone. “Would not I slay a score such as you and he for
her sake? A man's soul can only be lost once, and I am ready to go to
perdition for her--I have counted the cost. The best of the bargain is
with me! Out of my way, sir--out of my way!”

He took a few steps back, preparing to rush at the other. Wesley kept
his eyes upon him and stood with his feet firmly planted to stand
against his violence. But before the man could make his rush there was
sudden flash of light in his face, dazzling him and Wesley as well. The
light shifted.

Wesley turned to see whence it came. There was the sound of a hard boot
on the pebbles and a man's voice said:

“Avast there! Don't move a hand. I have a pistol covering ye, and a
cutlash is in my belt.”

“You have come in good time, whoever you be,” said Wesley. “But you will
have no need to use your weapons, sir.”

“Ay, ay, but if there's a move between ye, my gentlemen, I'll make
spindrift o' your brains. Ye hear?” was the response.

The man, who had flashed his lantern upon them--the dawn was still very
faint--came beside them and showed that he had not made an empty boast.
Wesley perceived that he was one of the Preventive men, fully armed.

He kept the blaze of his lantern on Bennet's face and then turned it on
Wesley, whom he appeared to recognise.

“In Heaven's name, sir, what's this?” he cried.

“Take no thought for us,” said Wesley. “Here lies a poor wretch washed
ashore. Give me your help to bring back life to him. No moment must be
lost--the loss of a minute may mean the loss of his life.”

He was already kneeling beside the prostrate figure. The Preventive man
followed his example. They both exclaimed in one voice:

“He is alive!”

“God be thanked,” said Wesley solemnly. “I feared----”

“You have treated him with skill, sir,” said the man. “You did not give
him a dram?”

“I have only been here a few minutes; the saving; of him from drowning
is not due to me,” said Wesley.

The man had his ration of rum in his knapsack, and was administering it,
Bennet standing by without a word.

“We must get help to carry him to the nearest house,” said the
Preventive man.

“I shall hasten to the village,” said Wesley. But he suddenly checked
himself. He knew that Ben-net's cunning would be equal to such a device
as to get rid of the revenue officer for the few minutes necessary to
crush the life out of the man on the sand. “No, on second thought yonder
man--his name is Bennet--will do this duty. John Bennet, you will hasten
to the nearest house--any house save Polwhele's--and return with at
least two of the fishermen. They will come hither with two oars and a
small sail--enough sailcloth to make into a hammock for the bearing of
the man with ease. You will do my bidding.”

“I will do your bidding,” said Bennet after a pause, and forthwith he
hurried away.

“What is all this, sir?” asked the man in a low tone when he had gone.
“I heard your voice and his--he is half a madman--they had the sound of
a quarrel.”

“You arrived in good time, friend,” said Wesley. “You say this man was
treated with skill in his emergency; if so, it must be placed to the
credit of John Bennet. I can say so much, but no more.”

“I'll ask no more from you, sir,” said the other, slowly and
suspiciously. “But if I heard of Ben-net's murdering a man I would
believe it sooner than any tale of his succouring one. He is a bit loose
in the hatches, as the saying is; I doubt if he will bear your message,
sir.”

“I shall make this sure by going myself,” said

Wesley. “I am of no help here; you have dealt with the half drowned
before now.”

“A score of times--and another score to the back of the first,” said the
man. “I tell you this one is well on the mend. But a warm blanket will
be more to him than an anker of Jamaica rum. You do well to follow
Bennet. Would the loan of a pistol be of any confidence to you in the
job?”

“There will be no heed for such now, even if I knew how to use one,”
 said Wesley.

He perceived that the man had his suspicions. He hurried away when he
had reached the track above the shingle.

It was quite light before he reached the nearest cottage, which stood
about a hundred yards east of the Port Street, and belonged to a
fisherman and boatwright named Garvice. The men and his sons had their
tar-pot on the brazier and had already begun work on a dinghy which lay
keel uppermost before them.

They looked with surprise at him when he asked if they had been long at
work.

“On'y a matter o' quartern hour,” replied the old man.

“Then you must have seen John Bennet and got his message?” said Wesley.

“Seen John Bennet? Ay, ay--still mad. Message? No message i' the world.
What message 'ud a hare-brainer like to 'un bear to folk wi' the five
senses o' Golmighty complete?” the old man enquired.

“Do you tell me that Bennet said naught to you about a half-drowned man
needing your help?” asked Wesley.

“No word. Even if so rigid a madman ha' carried that tale think ye we'd
be here the now?”

“'Tis as well that I came, though I thought it cruel to distrust him,”
 said Wesley.

He then told the man what was needed, and before he had spoken a dozen
words the old man had thrown down his tar-brush and was signalling his
sons to run down one of the boats to the water.

“Paddle round in half the time takes t' walk,” he said. “No back
breakin', no bone shakin 's my morter. Down she goes.”

Wesley was glad to accept a seat in the stern sheets of the small boat
which was run down to the water, not twenty yards from the building
shed; and when he returned with the three boatmen to that part of the
coast from which he had walked, he found the man to whose aid he had
come sitting up and able to say a word or two to the revenue man, who
was kneeling beside him, having just taken his empty rum bottle from his
mouth.

Old Garvice looked as if he felt that he had been brought from his work
under false pretences. He plodded slowly across the intervening piece of
beach a long way behind Mr. Wesley, and the Preventive man had reported
the progress to recovery made by the other before the Garvice family had
come up. The Garvices had had more than a nodding acquaintance with the
revenue authorities before this morning.

“John Bennet is a bigger rascal than I thought, and that's going far,”
 said the Preventive man when Wesley told him that no message had been
given at the Port. “If I come face to face with him, them that's nigh
will see some blood-letting. Why, e'en Ned Garvice, that I've been
trying to lay a trap for this twelve year, lets bygones be bygones when
there's a foundered man to succour.”

“Where is 'un?” enquired the old man with pointed satire, looking round
with a blank face.

The bedraggled man sitting on the beach was able to smile.

“Wish I'd had the head to bid you ask Neddy Garvice to carry hither a
bottle of his French brandy--ay, the lot that you run ashore when the
cutter fouled on the bank,” said the Preventive man.

“Oh, that lot? Had I got a billet from you, Freddy Wise, I'd ha' put a
stoup from the kegs o' the _Gorgon_ into my pocket,” said the old man
wickedly. Mr. Wesley did not know that the _Gorgon_ was a large ship
that had come ashore the previous year, and had been stripped bare by
the wreckers. “Oh, ay; the _Gorgon_ for brandy and the _Burglarmaster_
for schnapps, says I, and I sticks to that object o' creed, Freddy,
whatsoe'er you says.” The _Bourghermeister_ was the name of another
wreck whose stores the revenue men had been too slow to save some years
before.

But while these pleasantries were being exchanged between the men Wesley
was looking at the one in whose interests he was most concerned. He was
lying with his head supported by a crag on which Fred Wise had spread
his boat cloak. His face was frightfully pallid, and his forehead was
like wax, only across his temple there was a long ugly gash, around
which the blood had coagulated. His eyes were closed except at intervals
when he started, and they opened suddenly and began to stare rather
wildly. His arms hung down and his hands were lying limp on the beach
palms up, suggesting the helplessness of a dead man. He was clearly
a large and strongly built fellow, who could sail a ship and manage a
crew, using his head as well as his hands.

The others were looking at him critically; he was so far recovered that
they did not seem to think there was any imperative need for haste in
the matter of carrying him to a bed; although they criticised him as if
he were dead.

“Worser lads ha' gone down and heard of for nevermore,” said the old
fisherman. “Did he know that Squire Trevelyan buries free of all duty
all such as the sea washes up 'tween tides? That's the Vantage to be
drowned on these shores; but the Squire keeps that knowledge like a
solemn secret; fears there'd be a rush--they'd be jammin' one t'other
amongst crags as for who'd come foremost to his own funeral.”

“Tis no secret o' gravity, Ned Garvice, that you give orders to your
boys to carry you down in the cool o' the evening when you feel your
hour's at hand, and lay ye out trim and tidy for the flood-tide, so that
ye get a free funeral, and Parson Rodney's 'Earth t' earth' thrown into
the bargain,” said Wise.

“I've learned my sons to honour their father, and it puts 'un back a long
way in their 'struction to be face to face wi' 'un as has a hardened
scoff for his grey hairs,” said the fisherman. “Go your ways, lads, and
gather limpits so ye hear not evil words that shake your faith in your
ancient father. But what I can't see is how he got them finger-marks on
his neck.”

He pointed to the man on the beach.

“They ha' the aspect o' finger marks, now ha' they not, sir?” said Wise
meaningly, turning to Wesley.

“My thought, friends, amounts to this: I have heard that in cases
of rescue from drowning quickness is most needful for the complete
restoration of the sufferer,” said Wesley. “Now, sirs, I ask you is this
the moment for light gossip, when yonder poor fellow lies as if he had
not an hour's life in his body?”

“There's summat i' that, too,” said old Garvice, as if a matter which
he had been discussing had suddenly been presented to him in an entirely
new light.

“Oh, sir,” said the Preventive man, “when a corpse has revived so far
'tis thought best that he should have a short rest; it kind o' way knits
the body and soul together all the closer. The man is in no danger now,
I firmly believe; but, as you say, there's no need for wasting any more
time. Give us a heave under his other armpit, my lad. Heave handsomely;
there's naught but a thin halfhour 'twixt him and eternity--mind that,
and you won't jerk. Who's for his heels?”

The elder of Garvice's sons--a big lad of twenty--obeyed the
instructions of the revenue man, and Wesley and the old fisherman went
to the feet.

“'Vast hauling! Set me up on end,” said the man over whom they were
bending. He spoke in a low voice and weak; he did not seem to have
sufficient breath to make himself heard.

“Hear that?” said the fisherman with a sagacious wink. “There's the
lightsome and blithe quarter-deck voice o' your master-mariner when
warping into dock and his missus a-waitin' for 'un rosy as silk on the
pier-head.'Tis then that if so be that a man's genteel, it will out.”

“'Vast jaw, my hearty!” murmured the man wearily.

“That's the tone that fills the air wi' th' smell o' salt beef for me
whene'er I hears 'un--ay, sirs, salt beef more lifelike and lively than
this high ship-master who I trow hath ofttimes watched a ration toddle
round the cuddy table like to a guileless infant.”

“Heave all, with a will!” cried Wise, and the four men raised the other
as tenderly as a bulk so considerable could be taken off the ground,
and bore him with some staggering and heavy breathing, down to where the
youngest of the Garvice family was keeping the dinghy afloat over the
rapidly shallowing sand.

An hour later, when the day was still young, Wesley was kneeling by his
bedside giving thanks to Heaven for having allowed him to participate in
the privilege of saving a fellow-creature from death.




CHAPTER XXIV

He slept for an hour or two, but awoke feeling strangely unrefreshed.
But he joined Hartwell at breakfast and heard the news that the latter
had acquired during his usual half-hour's stroll through the village.

After shaking his guest warmly by the hand, Hartwell cried:

“What, Mr. Wesley, was it that you did not believe you had adventure
enough for one Summer's day, that you must needs fare forth in search of
others before sunrise?”

Wesley laughed.

“I ventured nothing, my good friend,” he said. “I came upon the
shipwrecked man by the blessing of God, in good time. I have been
wondering since I rose if he had suffered shipwreck. Did you learn so
much at the village--and pray hath he fully recovered himself?”

“I dare not say fully, but he has recovered himself enough to be able to
tell his story,” replied Hartwell.

“And he was wrecked?”

“Only swamped at sea. He is a ship-master, Snowdon, by name, but 'twas
not his own craft that went down, but only a miserable coasting
ketch that ventured from Bristol port to Poole with a cargo of
pottery--something eminently sinkable. Strange to say, Captain Snowdon
set out from Bristol, wanting to go no further than our own port; for
why? you ask. Why, sir, for a true lover's reason, which may be reckoned
by some folk as no reason at all--namely a hope to get speedily by the
side of his mistress, this lady being none other than our friend, the
pretty and virtuous young woman known as Nelly Polwhele.”

“Ah! Nelly Polwhele?”

“None other, sir. It seems that Nelly met this good master-mariner a
year ago at Bristol, and following the usage of all our swains, he falls
in love with her. And she, contrary to her usage of the stay-at-home
swains who piped to her, replies with love for love. But a long voyage
loomed before him, so after getting her promise, he sails for the China
Seas and the coast of the Great Mogul. Returning with a full heart and,
I doubt not, a full pocket as well, he is too impatient to wait for the
sailing of a middle-sized packet for Falmouth or Plymouth, he must needs
take a passage in the first thing shaped like a boat that meant to come
round the Lizard, and this was a ketch of some ten ton, that opened
every seam before the seas that the hurricane of yesterday raised up in
the Channel, and so got swamped when trying to run ashore on some soft
ground. Nelly's shipmaster, Mr. Snowdon, must have been struggling in
the water for something like four hours, and was washed up, well-nigh at
the very door of the young woman's cottage, and so--well, you know
more of the remainder of the story than doth any living man--not even
excepting the Captain himself.”

“And the young woman--have you heard how she received her lover?” asked
Wesley.

“Ah, that is the point at which Rumour becomes, for a marvel, discreetly
silent,” replied Hartwell. “I suppose it is taken for granted that the
theme has been dealt with too frequently by the poets to have need to be
further illustrated by a fisherman's daughter. Take my word for it, sir,
the young woman, despite her abundance of womanly traits, is a good and
kind and true girl at heart. She hath not been spoiled by the education
which she received as companion to the Squire's young ladies.”

“That was my judgment, too,” said Wesley. “I pray that the man will be
a good husband to her. His worldly position as the master of an East
Indiaman is an excellent one.”

“He will make her a very suitable husband,” said Hartwell. “I must
confess that I have had my fears for her. She is possessed of such
good looks--a dangerous possession for such a young woman, sir. These,
coupled with her intimate association with the Squire's daughters, might
have led her into danger. A less sensible girl would certainly be likely
to set her cap at someone a good deal above her in station--a dangerous
thing--very dangerous!”

“No doubt, sir. And now you are disposed to think that her happiness is,
humanly speaking, assured?”

“I think that she is a very fortunate young woman, and that the man is
even more fortunate still. Old Polwhele, in his whimsical way, however,
protests that he wishes the man whose intent it is to rob him of his
daughter, had got drowned. He grumbled about the part you played in the
matter--he was very whimsical. 'What, sir,' he grumbled to me just now,
'is Mr. Wesley not content with looking after our souls--is he turning
his attention to our bodies as well? Old Polwhele has a nimble wit.”

“It was not I, but John bennet, who was fortunate enough to restore the
man: he treated him altogether skilfully, the revenue patrol-man told
me.”

Hartwell threw up his hands in surprise. Then he frowned. He was plainly
puzzled for some time. At last he said:

“Mr. Wesley, if Bennet saved that man's life he must have stumbled on
him while it was yet dark--too dark to let him see the man's face.”

“But how should he know who the man was, even if he had seen his face?”

“He was acquainted with Mr. Snowdon at Bristol, and his grievance was
that if Snowdon had not appeared, the girl would have accepted his own
suit. Oh, yes; it must have been too dark for him to see the man's face,
or it would have gone hardly with the poor fellow.”

There was a considerable pause before Wesley said:

“You are right, it was too dark to allow him to recognise the man's
features. Has he been seen at the village during the morning?”

“If he has I heard nothing of it,” replied Hartwell, “it might be as
well to say a word of warning to Mr. Snowdon respecting him; he is a
madman, and dangerous. You do not forget the mad thing he said about you
on Sunday, sir?”

“I have not forgotten it,” said Wesley in a low voice. “I have not
forgotten it. I think that I shall set out upon my journey this
afternoon.”

The pause that he made between his sentences was so slight as to suggest
that they were actually connected--that there was some connection
between the thing that Bennet had said and his own speedy departure.

His host, who was in good spirits after his walk in the early sunshine,
gave a laugh and asked him in no spirit of gravity if he felt that it
was necessary for him to fly lest Captain Snowdon should develop the
same spirit of jealousy that had made Bennet fit for Bedlam.

Wesley shook his head and smiled.

“Need I ask your pardon for a pointless jest, sir?” cried Hartwell.
“Nay, dear sir and brother, I hope you will find good reason for
remaining with us for a few days still. You have had a trying time since
you came, Mr. Wesley; and I do not think that you are fit to set out on
so rude a journey.”

“I confess that I feel somewhat exhausted,” said Wesley, “but I have
hope that an hour or two in the saddle will restore me.”

Hartwell did his best to persuade him to reconcile himself to the idea
of staying in the neighbourhood for at least another day, but without
success.

“I must go. I feel that I must go, grateful though I be to you for your
offer of hospitality,” said Wesley.

“Then I will not say a further word. If it be a matter of feeling with
you, I do not feel justified in asking you to change your intention,”
 said Hartwell. “I shall give orders as to your horse without delay.”

But the horse was not needed that day, nor was it likely to be needed
for some time to come, for within the hour after breakfast Mr. Wesley
was overcome by a shivering fit and compelled to take to his bed. It
became plain that he had caught a chill--the wonder was that it had not
manifested itself sooner, considering that he had sat for so long the
day before in his saturated garments, and the very trying morning that
he had had. Mr. Hartwell, who had some knowledge of medicine, and a
considerable experience of the simpler maladies to which his miners were
subject, found that he was more than a little feverish, and expressed
the opinion that he would not be able to travel for a full week. Wesley,
who, himself, knew enough about the treatment of disease to allow of
his writing a book on the subject, agreed with him, that it was not
necessary to send for a physician, who might possibly differ from both
of them in his diagnosis.

For three days he remained in bed, and in spite of the fact that
he would have nothing to say to the Peruvian bark which his host so
strongly recommended, his feverish tendency gradually abated, and by
careful nursing he was able to sit up in his room by the end of a week.

In the meantime he had many visitors, though he refrained from seeing
any of them. His host told him that Miller Pendelley, Jake Pullsford,
and Hal Holmes had driven more than once from Ruthallion when they
heard of his illness; but of course the earliest and most constant of
the enquirers after his health were Nelly Polwhele and her lover. Mr.
Hartwell told him how greatly distressed they were, and perhaps it was
natural, he added, that the girl should be the one who laid the
greatest emphasis upon the fact that they were the cause of Mr. Wesley's
suffering. She was undoubtedly a sweet and unselfish girl, Hartwell
said; and he feared that Captain Snowdon thought that she was making
too great a fuss in referring to the risks which he, Wesley, had run to
bring her happiness. Snowdon, being a man, had not her imagination; and
besides his life had been made up of running risks for the benefit
of other people, and he was scarcely to be blamed if he took a less
emotional view of, at least, the incident of Wesley's finding him
exhausted on the shore in the early dawn.

“I spoke with him to-day,” said Hartwell when his guest was able to hear
these things, “and while he certainly showed himself greatly concerned
at your sickness, he grumbled, half humorously, when he touched upon
the way he was being neglected by the young woman. 'I am being hardly
treated, sir,' he said. 'What is a simple master-mariner at best
alongsides a parson with a persuasive voice? But when the parson adds on
to his other qualities the dash and derring-do of a hero it seems to me
that a plain man had best get into his boat, if so be that he have one,
and sail away--it boots not whither, so long as he goes. Oh, ay, sir, I
allow that your Mr. Wesley hath made short work of me.' Those were his
words; and though they were followed by an earnest enquiry after your
health, I could see that he would as lief that he owed his life to a
more ordinary man.”

“If I had not been overtaken by this sickness he would have had no cause
for complaint,” said Wesley. After a pause he touched with caution upon
a matter over which he had been thinking for some time.

“Mr. Snowdon heard nothing about a rival other than myself in the young
woman's regard?” he said.

“Oh, not he,” replied Hartwell quickly. “Snowdon is not the fellow to
listen to all that the gossips may say about Madam Nelly's liking for
admiration--he knows well that so pretty a thing will be slandered, even
when she shows herself to be wisely provident by seeking to have two
strings to her bow. But, indeed, whatever her weakness may have been
in the past, she hath been a changed girl since you first came hither.
Captain Snowdon has no rival but yourself, sir, and I am certain that
the honest fellow would not for the world that the young woman abated
aught of her gratitude to you. He has too large a heart to harbour any
thought so unworthy of a true man.”

“God forbid that anything should come between them and happiness,” said
Wesley.

“'Tis all unlikely,” said his host. “He must see that her love for him
must be in proportion to her gratitude to you for having done all that
you have done for him. If she did not love him dearly she would have no
need to be half so grateful to you.”

Wesley said nothing more on this point. He had not forgotten what Nelly
had confided to him and the counsel which he had given her just before
the hurricane had cut short their conversation on the cliffs. She had
told him her story, confessing that the man to whom she had given her
promise was less dear to her now that she was in daily expectation of
meeting him after the lapse of a year than he had been when they had
parted; and he had defined, in no doubtful language, the direction in
which her duty lay.

For the rest of the time that they were together neither he nor she had
made any reference to this matter; but he had not ceased to think upon
it. After what Mr. Hartwell had said he felt reassured. He had brought
himself to feel that he could only be happy if the girl's happiness were
assured; and he believed that this could only be accomplished by her
keeping the promise which she had given to a man who was worthy of her.
However she might have fancied that her love had waned or turned in
another direction during the year they had been parted, he was convinced
that it would return, as true and as fresh as before, with the return
of Captain Snowdon.

All that Hartwell had said bore him out in this view which he was
disposed to take of the way of this maid with the man. Hartwell was
a man of judgment and observation, and if there had been any division
between the two people in whom they were interested, he would
undoubtedly have noticed it. He had described the grievance of which
Snowdon had complained in a humorous way; and Wesley knew that if the
man felt that he had a grievance of the most grievous sort that can fall
upon a man, he would not have referred to it in such a spirit.

And then the day came when Wesley was able to talk, without being hushed
by his hospitable friend, of mounting his horse and resuming his-journey
in the west. He had many engagements, and was getting daily more anxious
to fulfil them before the summer should be over.

“If it rested with me, sir,” said Hartwell, “I would keep you here
for another month and feel that I was the most favoured of men; but in
this-matter I dare not be selfish. I know what, with God's blessing, you
seek to accomplish, and I feel that to stay you from your journey would
be an offence.”

“You have been more than good to me, my brother,” said Wesley. “And now
in parting from, you, I do not feel as did the Apostle Paul when leaving
those friends of his who sorrowed knowing that they should see his face
no more. I know that your sorrow is sincere, because I know how sincere
is my own, but if God is good to us we shall all meet again after a
season.”

“That is what we look forward to; you have sown the good seed among us
and you must return to see what your harvest will be,” said Hartwell.

They agreed that his horse was to be in readiness the next morning. This
was at their noon dinner, and they had scarcely risen from the table
when the maidservant entered with the enquiry if Mr. Wesley would allow
Captain Snowdon to have a word with him in private.

“I was expecting this visitor,” said Hartwell. “It would be cruel for
you to go away without receiving the man, albeit I think that you would
rather not hear him at this time. Let me reassure you: he will not be
extravagant in his acknowledgment of the debt which he owes to you; he
is a sailor, and scant of speech.”

“Why should I not see him?” said Wesley. “I am not afraid to face him!
even a demonstration of his gratitude. Pray let him be admitted.”

Very different indeed was the stalwart man who was shown into the room
from the poor half-drowned wretch whom Wesley had helped to carry
from the shore to the boat. Captain Snowdon stood over six feet--a
light-haired, blue-eyed man who suggested a resuscitated Viking of the
milder order, brown faced and with a certain indefinable expression of
shrewd kindliness which might occasionally take the form of humour and
make itself felt by a jovial slap on the back that would make most men
stagger.

He was shy, and he had plainly been walking fast.

These were the two things that Wesley noticed when Hartwell was shaking
hands with the man, and the latter had wiped his forehead with a
handkerchief as splendid as the western cloud of a sunset in the
Tropics--a handkerchief that seemed a floating section of the Empire of
the Great Mogul--dazzling in red and yellow and green--a wonder of the
silk loom.

“You and Mr. Wesley have already met, Mr. Snowdon,” said Hartwell with a
smile, and forthwith quitted the room.

Captain Snowdon looked after him rather wistfully. He seemed to be under
the impression that Mr. Hartwell had deserted him. Then he glanced with
something of surprise in the direction of Wesley, and was apparently
surprised to see his hand stretched out in greeting. He took the hand
very gingerly and with nothing of a seaman's bluffness or vigour.

“Seeing you at this time, Captain Snowdon, makes me have a pretty
conceit of myself,” said Wesley. “Yes, sir, I feel inclined to boast
that I was one of the four who bore you from the high beach to the
boat--I would boast of the fact only that I know I should never be
believed. You do not seem to have suffered by your mishap.”

“Thank you, sir, I am a man that turns the corner very soon in matters
of that sort, and then I race ahead,” replied the master-mariner.

“You have become accustomed to such accidents, sir,” said Wesley.

“Ay, sir, the salt sea and me have ever been friends, and more than once
we have had a friendly tussle together, but we bear no malice therefor,
neither of us--bless your heart, none whatever,” said Snowdon. “Why, the
sea is my partner in trade--the sea and the wind, we work together, but
you, Mr. Wesley, I grieve to see you thus, sir, knowing that 'twas on my
account. What if you'd been finished off this time--wouldn't the blame
fall on me? Shouldn't I be looked on as your murderer?”

“I cannot see on what principle you should, sir,” said Wesley. “In the
first place the chill from which I have now, by the blessing of Heaven,
fully recovered, was not due to my having been one of the four men who
carried you down the beach, though I should have no trouble in getting
anyone to believe that I suffered from exhaustion. No, Mr. Snowdon, I
had contracted the complaint before I was fortunate enough to come upon
you in my early morning's walk.”

“Anyway, sir, you earned my gratitude; though indeed, I feel as shy as a
school miss to mention such a word in your presence. If I know aught
of you, Mr. Wesley, and I think that I can take the measure of a man
whether he be a man or a parson, if I know aught of you, sir, I repeat,
you would be as uneasy to hear me talk of gratitude as I should be to
make an offer to talk of the same.”

“You are right in that respect, Mr. Snowdon. Between us--men that
understand each other--there need be no protestation of feeling.”

“Give me your hand, sir; you have just said what I should like to say.
I feel that you know what I feel--you know that if there was any way for
me to prove my gratitude---- ”

“Ah, you have said the word again, and I understood that it was to be
kept out of our conversation. But I am glad that you said so much, for
it enables me to say that you have the means of showing your gratitude
to Heaven for your preservation, and I know that you will not neglect
such means. You will be a good husband to Nelly Polwhele--that is the
way by which you will show how you appreciate the blessing of life!”

Captain Snowdon's face became serious--almost gloomy--as gloomy as the
face of such a man can become. He made no reply for a few moments. He
crossed the room and looked out of the window. Once more he pulled
out his handkerchief and mopped his brow with that bit of the gorgeous.
Orient.

Then he turned to Wesley, saying:

“Mr. Wesley, sir, I have come to you at this; time to talk about Nelly
Polwhele, if I may make so bold.”

“I can hear a great deal said about Nelly Polwhele so long as it is all
that is good,” said Wesley.

“I am not the man to say aught else,” said Snowdon. “Only--well, sir,
the truth is I don't quite know what to make of Nelly.”

“Make her your happy wife, Captain Snowdon,” said Wesley.

“That's what I look forward to, sir; but she is not of the same way of
thinking, worse luck!”

“You cannot mean that she--she--what, sir, did not she give you her
promise a year ago?”

“That she did, sir; but that's a year ago. Oh, Mr. Wesley, I believe
that all of her sex are more or less of a puzzle to a simple man, and in
matters of love all men are more or less simple, but Nelly is more of a
puzzle than them all put together.”

“How so? I have ever found her straightforward and natural--all that a
young woman should be.”.

“Ay, sir; but you have not been in love with her.”

Wesley looked at him for a moment or two without a word. Then he said:

“Pray proceed, sir.”

“The truth is, Mr. Wesley, the girl no longer loves me as she did, and
all this time my love for her has been growing,” said Snowdon. “Why,
sir, she as good as confessed it to me no later than yesterday, when I
taxed her with being changed. 'I must have another year,' she said. 'I
cannot marry you now.'Twould be cruel to forsake my father and mother,'
says she. 'You no longer love me, or you would not talk like that,' says
I, and she hung her head. It was a clear minute before she said, 'That
is not the truth, dear. How could I help loving you when I have given
you my promise. All I ask is that you should not want me to marry you
until I am sure of myself--another year,' says she. Now, Mr. Wesley, you
are a parson, but you know enough of the affairs of mankind to know what
all of this means--I know what it means, sir; it means that another
man has come between us. You can easily understand, Mr. Wesley, that
a well-favoured young woman, that has been educated above her station,
should have her fancies, and maybe set her affections on someone that
has spoken a word or two of flattery in her ear.”

“I can scarce believe that of her, Mr. Snowdon. But she was at the Bath
a few months ago, and perhaps--Mr. Snowdon, do you think that any words
of mine--any advice to her--would have effect?”

The sailor's eyes gleamed; he struck his left palm with his right fist.

“Why, sir, that's the very thing that I came hither to beg of you,” he
cried. “I know in what esteem she holds you, Mr. Wesley; and I said to
myself yesterday when I sat on the crags trying to worry out the day's
work so that I might arrive at the true position of the craft that I'm
a-trying to bring into haven--says I, ''Tis trying to caulk without
oakum to hope to prevail against a young woman that has a fancy that
she doesn't know her own mind. But in this case if there's anyone living
that she will listen to 'tis Mr. Wesley.' Those was my words.”

“I cannot promise that I shall prevail with her; but I have confidence
that she will at least hearken to me,” said Wesley.

“No fear about that, sir,” cried the other, almost joyfully. He took a
step or two toward the door, having picked up his hat, which he stood
twirling for a few moments. Then he slowly turned and faced Wesley once
again.

“Mr. Wesley,” he said in a low voice. “Mind this, sir: I would not have
you do anything in this matter unless you feel that 'twould be for
the good of the girl. 'Tis of the girl we have to think in the first
place--the girl and her happiness. We must keep that before us, mustn't
we, sir? So I ask of you as a man of judgment and wisdom and piety to
abstain from saying a word to her in my favour unless you are convinced
that I am the man to make her happy. Look at me, sir. I tell you that
I will not have the girl cajoled into marrying a man simply because she
has given him her promise. What! should she have a life of wretchedness
simply because a year ago she did not know her own mind?”

“Captain Snowdon, give me leave to tell you that you are a very noble
fellow,” said Wesley. “The way you have acted makes me more certain than
ever that Nelly Polwhele is the most fortunate young woman in Cornwall,
no matter what she may think of the matter. Since I have heard you, sir,
what before was a strong intention has become a duty. Hasten to Nelly
and send her hither.”

The man went to the door quickly, but when there he hesitated.

“To be sure 'twould be better if you was to speak to her without her
knowing that I had been with you; but we cannot help that; we are not
trying to trick the girl into keeping her promise,” said he.

“The knowledge that you have been with me would make no difference to
her,” said Wesley. “She knows that I would not advise her against my
judgment, to please even the man who, I know, loves her truly as man
could love woman.”

Captain Snowdon's broad back filled up the doorway in an instant.




CHAPTER XXV

John Wesley sat alone in the room, thinking his thoughts. They were
not unhappy, though tinged with a certain mournfulness at times.
The mournful tinge was due to the reflection that once more he must
reconcile himself to live alone in the world. For a brief space he had
had a hope that it might be given to him to share the homely joys of his
fellow-men. He now saw that it was not to be; and he bowed his head to
the decree of the Will which he knew could not err.

Alone? How could such a reflection have come to him? How could he who
sought to walk through the world with the Divine companionship of the
One to whom he trusted to guide his steps aright feel lonely or alone?

This was the thought that upheld him now. He could feel the hand that he
knew was ever stretched out to him. He touched it now as he had touched
it before, and he heard the voice that said:

“I have called ye friends.”

He was happy--as happy as the true man should be who knows that the
woman whom he loves is going to be made happy. He now perceived that
everything had been ordered for the best, this best being the ultimate
happiness of the woman whom he loved. He now saw that although he might
strive to bring happiness to her, he might never succeed in doing so.
Even if she had loved him her quick intelligence could not fail
to whisper to her what the people around them would be saying out
loud--that John Wesley had married the daughter of a humble fisherman of
Cornwall, and that that was no match for him to make. She would hear
it said that John Wesley, who was ever anxious for the dignity of the
Church to be maintained, had shown himself to be on the level with my
lord's greasy, sottish chaplain, who had showed himself ready to marry
my lady's maid when commanded to do so by his master, when circumstances
had made such an act desirable.

Would such a young woman as Nelly Polwhele be happy when now and again
she should hear these whispers and the consciousness was forced upon her
that John Wesley was believed to have made a fool of himself?

But even to assume what her thoughts would be was to assume that she had
loved him, and this she had never done. He was convinced that she had
never ceased to love the man to whom she had given her promise. To be
sure, she had told him when they had been together on the cliffs that
someone else had come into her life. But that he believed to be only a
passing fancy of hers. It was impossible that such a young woman, having
given her promise to so fine a fellow as Captain Snowdon, should allow
his place in her heart to be taken by anyone else.

He wondered if the Squire had a son as well as daughters. Nelly had
talked to him often enough about the young ladies, but not a word had
she breathed about a young gentleman. If there was a son, would it
be beyond the limits of experience that this village girl should be
captivated by his manners--was it beyond the limits of experience that
the young man might have been fascinated by the beauty of the girl and
so have talked to her as such young men so often did, in a strain of
flattery that flattered the poor things so that they were led to hope
that an offer of marriage was approaching?

He resolved to make enquiry on this point from Nelly herself should she
still maintain that her affection had changed. But meantime----

His lucubrations were interrupted by the sudden return of Captain
Snowdon. He was plainly in a condition of great excitement. His coat was
loose and his neckerchief was flying.

“We are too late, Mr. Wesley,” he cried. “We are too late. The girl has
given both of us the slip. I called at the cottage to fetch her hither.
I did not find her at home. This is what was put into my hand.”

He thrust out a piece of paper with writing upon it.

“_I cannot stay--I dare not stay any longer where I am forced to see you
every day, and am thus reminded of my promise which I know I cannot now
keep. Please try not to follow me; 'twould be of no use. I must be apart
from you before I make up my mind. I am very unhappy, and I know that
I am most unhappy because I have to give pain to one who is the best of
men._

“_Nelly._”

“You have read it?” cried Snowdon. “I had no notion that her whimsies
would carry her so far. Oh, she is but a girl after all--I tell you that
she is no more than a girl.”

“She is a girl, and I think that she is the best that lives, to be a
blessing to a good man's life,” said Wesley, returning the letter to his
trembling hand.

“The best? The best? She has made a fool of the man who would have died
to save her from the least hurt, and you call her the best!” he cried,
walking to and fro excitedly, crumpling up the letter with every stride.

“She is the best,” said Wesley. “Sir, cannot you see that those lines
were written by a woman who is anxious to be true to herself? Cannot you
see that her sole fear is that she may do an injustice to the man who
loves her?”

“You see things, sir, that none other can see; I am but a plain man, Mr.
Wesley, and I can see naught in this letter save the desire of a fickle
young woman to rid herself of a lover of whom she has grown weary. Well,
she has succeeded--she has succeeded! She exhorts me not to follow her.
She need not have been at the trouble to do so: I have no intention of
following her, even if I knew whither she has gone. Have you any guess
as to the direction she has taken? Not that I care--I tell you, sir, I
have no desire to follow her. Who do you suspect is her lover?”

“Mr. Snowdon,” said Wesley, “her lover stands before me in this room.
The poor child has had her doubts, as any true girl must have when she
thinks how serious a step is marriage, and the best way that you can
dissipate such doubts is to show to her that you have none.'Tis left for
you to prove yourself a true man in this matter, Captain Snowdon, and I
know that, being a true man, you will act as a true man should act.”

“I know not what you would suggest, sir, but I can promise you that if
you hint that I should seek to follow her, you make a mistake,” said
Snowdon.

“She may go whithersoever she pleases. I have no mind to be made a fool
of a second time by her. I have some self-respect still remaining, let
me tell you, Mr. Wesley.”

“You may be sure that no advice to sacrifice it will come from me, sir,”
 said Wesley. “Oh, Mr. Snowdon, did not you come to me an hour ago to
ask me to be your friend in this matter? Did you not ask me to give my
advice to the young woman of whom we have been speaking? Was not that
because you believed that my advice would be right?”

“I know that it would have been right, Mr. Wesley; but now----”

“If you could trust to me to give her good advice, why cannot you prove
that this was your hope, by hearkening to the advice which I am ready to
give to you?”

The big man, who was standing in the middle of the room, had made
several passionate attempts to speak, but none of them could be called
successful. When Wesley had put his last question, he tried to frame a
reply. He put out an arm with an uplifted forefinger and his lips began
to move. Not a word would come. He looked at Wesley straight in the
face for a long time, and then he suddenly turned away, dropped into the
nearest chair, and bent his head forward until his chin was on his hand,
and he was gazing at the floor.

Wesley let him be. He knew something of men and their feelings, as well
as their failings.

There was a long silence before the man arose and came to him, saying in
a low voice:

“Mr. Wesley, I will trust to your judgment. I will do whatsoever you bid
me.”

Wesley grasped him by the hand.

“I had no doubt of you, my friend,” he said. “I felt that any man whom
Nelly Polwhele loved----”

“Ay, loved--loved!” interjected Snowdon.

“Loves--loves--in love there is no past tense,” said Wesley. “She loved
you, and she loves you still--she will love you forever. You will come
with me, and I know that mine will be the great happiness of bringing
you together. What greater happiness could come to such as I than this
which, by the grace of Heaven, shall be mine?”

“She gave you her confidence? You know whither she has fled?”

Wesley shook his head.

“She told me nothing; remember that I have not seen her since you
returned to her,” he said. “But I think that I can say whither she has
gone.'Tis but six or seven miles from here. Have you heard of Ruthallion
Mill?”

The mariner struck the palm of his left hand with his right fist. The
blow had weight enough in it to make the casements quiver.

“Wherefore could I not have thought of the Mill?” he cried.' “I was fool
enough to let a thought of Squire Trevelyan's Court come into my mind.”

“I have no doubt that we shall find her at the Mill,” said Wesley. “The
miller has been a second father to her, and, besides, he has a daughter.
'Tis to friends such as these that she would go for succour and sympathy
in her hour of trouble.” Captain Snowdon mused for a moment.

“How do I know that they will be on my side, Mr. Wesley?” he asked.
“They may reckon that she has been ill-used--that she has a right to
change her mind and to choose whomsoever she will.”

“Mr. Snowdon,” said Wesley, “it doth not need that one should be
possessed of a judgment beyond that of ordinary people to decide the
right and the wrong of this affair in which we all take a huge interest.
Come, sir, let us prepare for the best and not for the worst. What, are
you a master-mariner and yet have not learned that the best way to stamp
out a mutiny is by a display of promptitude. Let us lose no time over
the discussion of what the result of our action may be--let us act at
once.”

He went to the door..

“Nay, sir; but you are a sick man--how will you make this journey?” said
Snowdon.

“I am no longer a sick man,” said Wesley. “I would not give a second
thought to the setting out upon a journey to the Mill on foot. But there
will be no need for this. Mr. Hartwell will lend us his light cart; it
will hold three.”

“Three? But we are but two, sir.”

“Ay, Mr. Snowdon--only two for the journey to the Mill; but we shall
need an extra seat for our return.”

A few words to Mr. Hartwell and his easy running waggon was at the door.
The drive through the valley of the Lana on this lovely afternoon had
an exhilarating effect upon Captain Snowdon, for Wesley took care that
their conversation should be-on topics far removed from their mission
at this time. He wished to be made acquainted with his companion's views
respecting many matters of the Orient. Was it possible that the Jesuits
had sent missionaries to the Indies and even to China? Had Captain
Snowdon had any opportunity of noting-the result of their labours? Had
Captain Snowdon learned if the Jesuits discountenanced any of the odious
native customs such as the burning of widows--the throwing of infants
into the sacred river of Ganges? Or did the missioners content
themselves with simple preaching?

The journey to the Mill was all too short to allow of Captain Snowdon's
answering more than a few of the questions put to him by the discreet
Mr. Wesley, and it was not until they were turning down the little lane
that the ship-master came to an abrupt end of his replies, and put the
nervous question to his companion:

“Shall we find her here, or have we come on a wild-goose chase?”

In a few minutes they were in her presence--almost in her presence; they
caught sight of her flying through the inner door when they entered the
Mill room.

The miller, in his shirtsleeves and wearing his working apron, gave a
loud laugh and shouted “Stop thief!” but his daughter and her mother
were looking grave and tearful. They moved to the door by which Nelly
had made her escape, but checked themselves and returned to greet Wesley
and Snowdon. They hoped that the sun had not been overwarm during the
drive through the valley, and that Mr. Wesley had fully recovered from
his sickness.

The miller came to the point with his usual directness.

“You have come to carry the girl home with you, I doubt not?” he said;
and forthwith his wife and daughter made for the door.

Captain Snowdon looked ill at ease. He glanced toward the outer door.

“How oft have I not told her that a judgment would fall upon her for
the heartburnings that she brought about--all through her kindness o'
heart?” continued the miller. “Poor daughter! But they all go through
the same course, Captain, of that you may be assured, albeit I doubt not
that you think that so dread a case as yours has never been known i'
the world before. When the marriage day draws nigh, the sweetest and the
surest of them all has a misgiving. Don't be too ready to blame them,
sir. The wonder is that when she sees so many errors hurried into under
the name of marriage, any maid can bring herself to take upon her the
bondage.” Captain Snowdon nodded sideways and looked shyly down.

“Nature is stronger than experience, miller,” said Wesley. “I am
bold enough to think that you could give Mr. Snowdon a pinch of your
experience in your garden, after you have told Nelly that I seek a word
with her here. I am pretty certain that I shall have completed my task
before your experiences as a married man are exhausted.”

“Right, sir,” said the miller. “Captain, I show you the door in no
inhospitable spirit. I'll join you in the turning of a pinion.”

Captain Snowdon seemed pleased to have a chance of retiring, returning
to the open air; he hurried out by one door, while the miller went
through the other and shouted for Nelly. His wife's remonstrance with
him for his unfeeling boisterousness reached Wesley, who was now alone
in the room.

He was not kept long waiting. Nelly entered, the miller leading her by
the hand, and then walking slowly to the outer door..

“My dear, you know why I have come hither,” said Wesley, taking her hand
in both of his own. “You asked for my counsel once, and I gave it to
you. I could only give it to you at that time in a general way. I had
not seen the man to whom you had given your promise; but having seen
him, and knowing what manner of man he is--and I am something of a judge
of a man's character--I feel that I would be lacking in my duty to you,
dear child, if I were to refrain from coming to you to plead for--for
your own happiness.”

“Have I forfeited all your esteem by my behaviour, sir?” she cried,
still holding his hand and looking at him with piteous eyes. “Do you
think of me as a light-minded girl, because I confessed to you--all that
I did confess?”

“I have never ceased to think of you with affection,” he said.

“Ah! the affection of a man who is esteemed by all the world, for a poor
girl who touched the hem of his life, and then passed away never to be
seen by him again.”

She spoke in a curious tone of reproach. He looked at her, asking
himself what she meant.

“Child, child, you little know how I have thought of you,” he said
slowly. “Do you believe that the path of my life has been so gilded with
sunshine that I take no count of such hours as we passed together when
we walked through the valley, side by side--when we sat together on the
cliffs?”

She gave a little cry of joy and caught up his hand and kissed it.

He was startled. He turned his eyes upon her. She was rosy red. Her head
was bowed.

In that instant he read her secret.

There was a long silence. Only occasionally a little sob came from her.

“Child,” he said in a low voice. “Child, you have been very dear to me.”

She looked up with streaming eyes.

“Say those words again--again,” she cried in faltering tones.

“They are true words, my dear,” he said. “The life which it has been
decreed that I shall lead must be one of loneliness--what most men and
all women call loneliness. Such joys of life as love and marriage and a
home can never be for me. I have given myself over body and soul to the
work of my Master, and I look on myself as separate forever from all the
tenderness of life. They are not for me.”

“Why should they not be for you? You have need of them, Mr. Wesley?”

“Why should they not be for me, do you ask?” he cried. “They are not for
me, because I have been set to do a work that cannot be done without
a complete sacrifice of self. Because I have found by the bitterest
experience, that so far as I myself am concerned--I dare not speak for
another--these things war against the Spirit. If I thought it possible
that a woman should be led to love me I would never see her again.”

“Oh, do not say that--do not say that!” she said piteously.

“I do say it,” he cried. “Never--never--never would I do so great an
injustice to a woman as to marry her. I tell you that I would think of
it as a curse and not a blessing. I know that I have been appointed to
do a great work, and I am ready, with God's help, to trample beneath my
feet everything of life that would turn my thoughts from that work. The
words are sounding in my ear day and night--day and night, 'If any man
come to Me and hate not his father and mother and wife and children
and brethren and sisters--yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple.'”

He stood away from her, speaking fervently. His face, pale by reason
of his illness, had become paler still: but his resolution had not
faltered, his voice had not broken.

She had kept her eyes fixed upon him. The expression upon her face was
one of awe.

She shuddered when he took a step toward her and held out a thin white
hand to her. She touched it slowly with her own.

“Nelly,” he said, “there is a joy in self-sacrifice beyond any that
the world can give. I look on you as one of my children--one of that
Household of Faith who have told me that they had learned the Truth from
my lips. My child, if you were called on to make any great sacrifice for
the Truth, would you not make it? Although I may seem an austere man to
you, I do not live so far apart from those who are dear to me as to be
incapable of sympathising with them in all matters of their daily life.
I think you knew that or you would not have confessed to me that you
fancied your love had suffered a change.”

She rose from her chair, and passed a hand wearily across her face.

“A fancy--it was a fancy--a dream--oh, the most foolish dream that ever
a maiden had,” she said. “Has it ever been known that a maiden fancied
she loved the shadow of a dream when all the time her heart was given to
a true man?”

“Dear child, have you awakened?” he asked.

“My dreaming time is past,” she replied.

“I may bid Captain Snowdon to enter?” he said.

“Not yet--not yet--I must be alone; I will see him in another hour.”

He kissed her on the forehead, and went with unfaltering feet into the
sunshine.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Love That Prevailed, by Frank Frankfort Moore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOVE THAT PREVAILED ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


