The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Men on Deck: Master, Mates and Crew, Their Duties and Responsibilities
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Men on Deck: Master, Mates and Crew, Their Duties and Responsibilities

Author: Felix Riesenberg

Release date: August 31, 2018 [eBook #57820]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Curnow, Chris Pinfield and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEN ON DECK: MASTER, MATES AND CREW, THEIR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Chris Pinfield and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





Transcriber's Note:

Apparent typographical errors have been corrected. Small capitals have
been converted to full capitals. Italic font is indicated by
_underscores_ and bold font (other than headings) by +plus signs+.

A line in blackletter font in the dedication has been bolded. The use of
hyphens has been rationalised. Sub-paragraphs and lists have been
indented.

An advertisement for another book by the same author has been shifted
to the back of the book.

Chapter XVIII describes the Rules of the Road as they apply to the
High Seas and to U.S. Inland Waters. In the original work corresponding
passages are set out on opposite pages. In this version the Rules
applying to the High Seas are followed by those applying to Inland
Waters. U.S. Inland Waters are defined in Chapter XIX.




 THE
 MEN ON DECK

 Master, Mates and Crew
 Their Duties and Responsibilities

 _A MANUAL
 for
 The American Merchant Service_

 BY
 FELIX RIESENBERG, C.E.
 MASTER MARINER (SAIL AND STEAM)

 Superintendent, New York State Nautical School,
 Commanding Schoolship "Newport"
 Author of "Under Sail"

[Illustration: Publisher's Mark]

 NEW YORK
 D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY
 25 PARK PLACE
 1918


 COPYRIGHT, 1918
 BY
 D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY


 DEDICATED TO
 +Captain Reginald Fay+
 OF THE PORT OF NEW YORK
 IN RECOGNITION OF
 HIS UNTIRING EFFORTS
 FOR
 THE BETTERMENT
 OF THE
 AMERICAN MERCHANT MARINE




Preface


In the days of sail, the duties of masters, mates, and crews, were well
defined. Sea practice, in the various rigs, had become standard with the
authority of an ancient calling.

The art of sailing, and of rigging ships, was a precise matter. Gear
remained standard for a century. The main to'bowline of a Black Ball
Liner, tearing to windward in a North Atlantic hummer, was rove and led
in much the same fashion as the main to'bowline of the ships of Nelson
and Van Tromp. And the old time seamen, in their usage and habits,
followed the regularity of the ships upon which they sailed.

The gradual transition from sail to steam carried with it, for a time,
the old system of sailing ship routine. But to-day the sailing ship
sailor is a thing of the past; the works of steam and steel are upon the
waters—we are in the age of engines and the engineer. Great problems of
mechanical propulsion, and of construction, are constantly presenting
themselves, and the successors of the ancient mariner, the modern
master, mates, and crew; the "deck department," if you will, of the
present day steamer, find themselves afloat with different gear and
under different conditions every time they change vessels.

No standard form of sea training has yet come to take the place of the
old-time apprentice system of sail, and in addition to ships that are
far from standard, we find that many ideas prevail as to the duties and
organization of the seamanship branch of the modern steamer.

Able as they may be individually, officers of mixed training are
constantly being thrown together in vessels of the merchant service,
while in most cases crews are picked up haphazard from the beach. It is
not to be wondered at that many ideas prevail as to the proper way of
doing things. Indeed, many otherwise intelligent officers often have a
very hazy notion as to just what they are supposed to do, or to know.

Seamen are often confused, through lack of knowledge, as to what may be
expected of them; one vessel is run one way, and another one may be
quite different. In fact the lack of uniformity at sea breeds
uncertainty and makes for disorder in situations where order and
discipline are essential.

Among many junior officers in the merchant service a notion prevails
that their main object in life is to get along with as little effort as
possible while awaiting early promotion and increased pay—they look
forward hopefully to that glad day when they will wear the Master's
stripes, with all day ashore, while in port, and all night in, while at
sea—this book will not be agreeable reading for them.

In the following pages an attempt is made to point out the things the
various members of the deck department of an ocean steam vessel may
reasonably be expected to know, and the things that they may be required
to do. The book does not pretend to tell HOW, but the object is to show
WHAT a modern American Seaman ought to know, and to do, and to lay
before him the laws by which his calling is regulated.

It is also hoped that the book will help to inform owners and shore
managers of the kind and quality of service that they should expect from
sea officers and men. It is hoped that it will also aid in creating a
greater respect for the quality of the men who go down to the sea in
steamers; sail has gone, but a mighty wake of heavy gear and great
responsibility has come along to take its place.

Great Lakes officers and seamen, who are being called to salt water
during the winter season, as a matter of war emergency, will, it is
hoped, find the following pages of use in their new situations.

In conclusion it may be well to remind the hard-working merchantman that
while many things are expected of him fortunately he is not required to
do them all at once, nor do the United States Local Inspectors examine
him upon all of the things mentioned in the pages of this little book.

The American who goes to sea to-day will not content himself with
minimum requirements. He means to be more than a ten-per cent seaman.
War emergencies have sent many men out on blue water who formerly would
never have reached the deck or bridge. They know their limitations—all
we can do is to point out the way.

The Author will welcome suggestions and criticisms from officers and men
of the Merchant Marine who happen to read the pages of this book.
Standard practice at sea is desirable, and such practice can best be
achieved by some common ground upon which all minds may meet and
reasonably agree.

Letters addressed in care of my publishers, D. Van Nostrand Company, 25
Park Place, New York, will be forwarded to me and be appreciated.

 F. R.
 SCHOOLSHIP NEWPORT,
 May 1, 1918.




Table of Contents


 CHAPTER                                                            PAGE

     I. THE MASTER                                                     1

    II. LAWS AFFECTING THE DUTIES OF THE MASTER                        9

   III. ENTRY AND CLEARANCE                                           18

    IV. ENTRY OF MERCHANDISE                                          27

     V. LIABILITY OF OWNERS, MASTERS, AND SHIPPERS                    53

    VI. MISCELLANEOUS LAWS                                            59

   VII. THE CHIEF MATE                                                72

  VIII. THE CHIEF MATE (_Continued_)                                  92

    IX. RULES OF THE U. S. SUPERVISING INSPECTORS RELATING
        TO LIFESAVING                                                103

     X. PASSENGER ACT OF 1882                                        116

    XI. THE SECOND MATE                                              128

   XII. THE THIRD MATE                                               131

  XIII. THE JUNIOR OFFICERS                                          133

   XIV. CADETS                                                       145

    XV. LAWS DEFINING OFFICERS OF THE MERCHANT MARINE                146

   XVI. EXAMINATIONS FOR LICENSES; MASTER AND MATES                  153

  XVII. THE WATCH OFFICER                                            167

 XVIII. THE RULES OF THE ROAD—INTERNATIONAL—INLAND                   184

   XIX. THE LIMITS OF U. S. INLAND WATERS                            222

    XX. THE QUARTERMASTERS                                           229

   XXI. THE CARPENTER                                                231

  XXII. THE BOATSWAIN                                                234

 XXIII. ABLE SEAMEN                                                  236

  XXIV. U. S. NAVIGATION LAWS RELATING TO MERCHANT SEAMEN            241

   XXV. DISCIPLINE AT SEA                                            286

 APPENDIX A. CUSTOMS DISTRICTS, PORTS AND SUB-PORTS
             OF THE UNITED STATES                                    305

 APPENDIX B. THE SEA LIBRARY                                         319




THE MEN ON DECK




CHAPTER I

THE MASTER


The Master Mariner who has the vessel in charge is called the CAPTAIN,
or the MASTER, the latter being his official title. It is correct,
however, to address the master of a vessel as CAPTAIN, a courtesy to
which the Master Mariner is fully entitled through ancient sea usage.

Among seagoing people, the Master Mariner who is in charge of a vessel
+is in complete charge at all times+; divided authority in this matter
is intolerable to the minds of men accustomed to the sea.

+The Master is responsible as follows:—+

+For the safe handling of his vessel in and out of port.+

+For the safe and expeditious navigation of his vessel from port to
port.+

+For the good management, and order, of the various departments that
constitute the internal economy of his vessel—deck—engine—steward's—etc.+

+He is responsible for the safety of the lives of passengers and crew.+

+He is responsible for the safe stowage, carriage, and unlading of the
cargo.+

+The vessel is his direct responsibility. If the Pilot is in charge,
this does not relieve the Master of his full responsibility.+

+The Master is responsible to the owners.+

+He is also responsible to the insurance underwriters.+

+He is also responsible to the Government of the United States, under
which he receives his license as a Master Mariner.+

The Master Mariner who is well qualified to bear the great
responsibilities of his station; to have the keeping of many lives in
his charge; to be the sole judge of what is right and proper in times of
emergency; such a man is not made in a year, nor is he the product of
any short-cut system of training. His sea lore must be learned at sea.
His duty to ship and cargo must be truly come by through close and
thorough contact with the great vessels he is called upon to command.

The Master Mariner must be a student of the laws governing his business
upon the sea, and of the laws defining his duties and responsibilities
to ship, passengers, crew, and cargo.

Briefly, he is charged with the following specific duties and
responsibilities:

+1. The safe navigation of his vessel.+

+2. The general management and care of his vessel.+

+3. The proper coaling—provisioning—supplying of water—etc.+

+4. That she be fully found—anchors—cables—warps—hawsers—boats—rafts—
life-saving equipment—fire-fighting equipment, as required by law—
compasses—chronometers—charts—sailing directions—sextants—and stores of
all kinds needed to safely navigate her.+

+5. The proper signing of the ship's articles.+

+6. The keeping of the Official Log.+

+7. The carrying of a properly equipped medicine chest.+

+8. The carrying of a required slop chest, and compliance with the laws
regulating the sale of slops.+

+9. He is liable for the wrong delivery of specie and cargo, or for loss
or damage to the same due to carelessness or mismanagement on the part
of the crew.+

+10. He is responsible for any neglect through which the validity of the
insurance to ship or cargo is called into question.+

+11. He must enforce the rule that the vessel is never to be left
without an officer in charge, either at sea or in harbor, day or night.+

+12. He shall see that a licensed engineer officer is on duty when steam
is up on a boiler.+

+13. When maneuvering—in and out of port—or at sea, he should see that
the most qualified engineer officers on board are in charge of the
working of the engines.+

+14. He must see that no waste or extravagance is practiced with the
ship's stores and provisions.+

+15. He must see that the lawful scale of provisions is issued to the
crew.+

+16. He must see that no prohibited cargo or stores come aboard, and
that his hatches are battened down before going to sea. He is
responsible for the correct lading of the vessel.+

+17. He must enter and clear his vessel at the custom house. He must see
that the proper papers are produced. Ship's register (with his name
entered as master); Manifest; Bills of Health; Passenger and stores
list; and any other papers that may be required.+

+18. He must be familiar with the laws, rules, and regulations in force
in the various countries and at the various ports he visits.+

+19. He should find out where to obtain the services of the local
medical authorities, and the police authorities, when in a strange
port.+

+20. He should study the charter under which he is operating—if under
charter. Is it a "time charter" or a "trip charter"? He will be largely
responsible for the carrying out of his owner's part of the contract. If
abroad he may sign the charter party, as agent of the owner.+

+21. He is the accredited representative of the owner. He has the
authority to act contrary to the wishes of the ship's agents, when he is
satisfied that such action is to the best interests of his owners; he
must be prepared to bear full responsibility for his actions.+

+22. He is responsible to his owners for the safety of his vessel,
whether he is on board or not.+

+23. He cannot delegate his authority, or name his successor to command,
without the consent of his owners—unless physically unfit for duty, and
then he has the authority to retain command and delegate such duties as
he may be unable to perform himself.+

+24. He is always in command of and responsible for the safety of the
vessel, whether he is using the services of a pilot, or otherwise, and
his station, while in pilot waters under way, is on the bridge.+

+25. He has the authority to take the vessel from the pilot's control at
any time, when in his opinion her safety demands such action. The use of
the pilot indicates that the most careful measures are being taken to
prevent accident, and for the protection of the insurance underwriters.
Under such conditions, the taking over of the vessel from the pilot is
weighted with the fullest responsibility.+

+26. He is responsible for the correct keeping of the wage account of
the crew.+

+27. He is responsible for the safe carriage of mail entrusted to the
vessel.+

+28. He is responsible for the acceptance on board of anyone except his
crew, or regularly accredited passengers. He is accountable to the port
authorities of the first port visited, for the presence of the same.+

+29. He must see that the legal requirements safeguarding the carriage
of live stock are complied with.+

+30. He shall handle his vessel in conformity with the International
Rules of the Road at Sea, or the Inland Rules, depending upon the waters
in which he is navigating; he must know if he is on the high seas, or
within the limits defined as inland waters.+

+31. He is the responsible navigator of his vessel, and cannot delegate
this responsibility.+

+32. He must see that the officers and men respect the laws and
regulations of the ports visited, that no contraband or dutiable
articles are brought on board in violation of the same.+

+33. He must take steps to prevent smuggling.+

+34. He must keep a record of all fines, punishments, and charges
against members of the crew, and must not permit punishment to be
inflicted that is contrary to law, and only such punishment as is
sanctioned by his express order. In the Official Log, where these
entries are to be made, he must specify the nature and extent of the
punishment.+

+35. In the Official Log Book he must enter the following:+

 _First._ Every legal conviction of any member of his crew, and the
 punishment inflicted.

 _Second._ Every offense committed by any member of his crew for which
 it is intended to prosecute or to enforce a forfeiture, together with
 such statement concerning the reading over such entry, and concerning
 the reply, if any, made to the charge, as is required by the provisions
 of section forty-five hundred and ninety-seven.

 _Third._ Every offense for which punishment is inflicted on board, and
 the punishment inflicted.

 _Fourth._ A statement of the conduct, character, and qualifications of
 each of his crew; or a statement that he declines to give an opinion of
 such particulars.

 _Fifth._ Every case of illness or injury happening to any member of the
 crew, with the nature thereof, and the medical treatment.

 _Sixth._ Every case of death happening on board, with the cause thereof.

 _Seventh._ Every birth happening on board, with the sex of the infant,
 and the names of the parents.

 _Eighth._ Every marriage taking place on board, with the names and ages
 of the parties.

 _Ninth._ The name of every seamen or apprentice who ceases to be a
 member of the crew otherwise than by death, with the place, time,
 manner, and cause thereof.

 _Tenth._ The wages due to any seaman or apprentice who dies during the
 voyage, and the gross amount of all deductions to be made therefrom.

 _Eleventh._ The sale of the effects of any seaman or apprentice who
 dies during the voyage, including a statement of each article sold, and
 the sum received for it.

 _Twelfth._ In every case of collision in which it is practicable so to
 do, the master shall, immediately after the occurrence, cause a
 statement thereof, and of the circumstances under which the same
 occurred, to be entered in the official log-book. Such entry shall be
 made in the manner prescribed in section forty-two hundred and
 ninety-one, and failure to make such entry shall subject the offender
 to the penalties prescribed by section forty-two hundred and
 ninety-two. (R. S., 4290; Feb. 14, 1900.)

Every entry hereby required to be made in the official log-book shall be
signed by the master and by the mate, or some other one of the crew, and
every entry in the official log-book shall be made as soon as possible
after the occurrence to which it relates, and, if not made on the same
day as the occurrence to which it relates, shall be made and dated so as
to show the date of the occurrence, and of the entry respecting it; and
in no case shall any entry therein, in respect of any occurrence
happening previously to the arrival of the vessel at her final port, be
made more than twenty-four hours after such arrival. (R. S., 4291.)

If in any case the official log-book is not kept in the manner hereby
required, or if any entry hereby directed to be made in any such
log-book is not made at the time and in the manner hereby directed, the
master shall, for each such offense, be liable to a penalty of not more
than twenty-five dollars; and every person who makes, or procures to be
made, or assists in making, any entry in any official log-book in
respect of any occurrence happening previously to the arrival of the
vessel at her final port of discharge, more than twenty-four hours after
such arrival, shall, for each offense, be liable to a penalty of not
more than one hundred and fifty dollars. (R. S., 4292.)

+36. He must see that the ship's log-book is properly kept.+

+37. He must see that the property of deceased persons is disposed of
according to law.+

+38. He must not depart from the safest and most usual course in making
a passage between the designated ports of his voyage, unless under
instruction from legal authorities, as in time of war.+

+40. He must not depart from port, unless authorized to do so by the
proper port or other authorities.+

+41. He must see that all drills and inspections required by law are
carried out and record of same made in the official log-book.+

+42. In case of collision he must stand by, and give the name and
hailing port of his vessel, if required.+

+43. He must make the required reports to the U. S. Local Inspectors,
concerning all matters laid down in their rules.+

+44. He must see that his officers stand proper watches and conform to
all the requirements of the law.+

+45. He must see that the licenses of all licensed officers are
exhibited as required by law.+

+46. He must see that the requirements of the vessel's Certificate of
Inspection are rigidly adhered to—passengers—steam pressure—etc.+

+47. He should report promptly to his owners, and to the U. S. Local
Inspectors, all details regarding accidents.+

+48. He must see that orderly conduct is maintained by his passengers as
well as his crew—He must regularly inspect the quarters and
accommodations assigned to them—must see to the ventilation—warmth—and
cleanliness—of sleeping and dining rooms, and the cleanliness of
kitchens, pantries, store rooms, bath rooms and lavatories.+

+49. He should be familiar with the regulations of the customs
authorities of the ports to which he is trading. He should know the
customs districts, ports and sub-ports of entry in the United States.+

+50. He should study the navigation laws of the United States.+

+51. Being MASTER, he should really be a Master Mariner in every sense
of the word. He should know his ship, her cargo, whatever it may be, and
he should never be satisfied until he is skilled in every branch of the
art of navigation and seamanship.+

+52. He has the authority to suspend officers from duty, for cause, and
in the case of mutinous conduct at sea, he is justified in putting in
irons any member of his crew, or any officer, or passenger, when the
safety and discipline of the vessel require such action.+

+53. At sea, or outside any legal jurisdiction, he is justified, as a
matter of protecting the lives and property in his care, to take human
life, when other measures are inadequate to this end.+

+54. He may be called upon to set a leg, or saw it off—to deliver a
woman in childbirth—to perform the marriage ceremony—or to read the
burial service at sea.+

+55. In the event of disaster; he must see to the safety of all hands,
passengers and crew.+

+56. When his vessel founders, he must be the last man to leave the
ship.+




CHAPTER II

LAWS AFFECTING THE DUTIES OF THE MASTER


The principal laws of the United States affecting the duties and
responsibilities of the Master are appended. Much of the bulk of the
law, having to do with the construction of vessels and their fitting,
and regulating the methods of inspection and control are omitted, and
only those parts are given that directly affect the Master himself.

Much of the law, to the mind of a sailor, could be boiled down and
simplified—perhaps some day sailors will go to Congress and do this—in
the mean time the best that can be done is to make an attempt to
unscramble the hodge-podge of rules, regulations, specifications,
penalties, and what not, that fill the bulky red volume issued by the
Bureau of Navigation, Department of Commerce.


Master's oath of citizenship. Upon making application for
registry of a vessel.

If the master of a vessel is within the district where a registry
thereof is to be made, when application is made for registering the
same, he shall himself, instead of the owner, or of the agent, or
attorney, as hereinafter mentioned, make oath touching his being a
citizen, and the means whereby or manner in which he is citizen; in
which case, if the master shall knowingly swear to anything untrue, no
forfeiture of the vessel, on account of such false oath, shall be
incurred, but the master shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand
dollars. (R. S., 4144.)


Change of master.

When the master or person having the charge or command of a registered
vessel is changed, the owner, or one of the owners, or the new master of
such vessel, shall report such change to the collector of the district
where the same has happened, or where the vessel shall first be after
the same has happened, and shall produce to him the certificate of
registry of such vessel, and shall make oath, showing that such new
master is a citizen of the United States, and the manner in which or
means whereby he is so a citizen. Thereupon the collector shall indorse
upon the certificate of registry a memorandum of such change, specifying
the name of such new master, and shall subscribe the memorandum with his
name; and if other than the collector of the district by whom the
certificate of registry was granted, shall transmit a copy of the
memorandum to him, with notice of the particular vessel to which it
relates; and the collector of the district, by whom the certificate
shall have been granted, shall make a like memorandum of such change in
his book of registers, and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
Commissioner of Navigation. If the change is not reported, or if the
oath is not taken, as above directed, the registry of such vessel shall
be void, and the master or person having the charge or command of her
shall be liable to a penalty of one hundred dollars. (R. S., 4171—July
5, 1884; sec. 2.)


Master must produce ship's register when entry is made.

The master or other person having the command or charge of any vessel,
recorded in pursuance of this Title [R. S., 4131-4305], shall, on entry
of such vessel, produce the certificate of such record to the collector
of the district where she is so entered; and in default thereof the
vessel shall not be entitled to the privileges of a recorded vessel. (R.
S., 4184.)


Offenses against the registry law.

Every collector or officer who knowingly makes, or is concerned in
making, any false register or record, or who knowingly grants or is
concerned in granting, any false certificate of registry or record of or
for any vessel, or any other false document whatever touching the same,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Title [R. S.,
4131-4305], or who designedly takes any other or greater fees than are
by this Title allowed, or who receives any voluntary reward or gratuity
for any of the services performed, pursuant thereto; and every surveyor
or other person appointed to measure any vessel, who willfully delivers
to any collector or naval officer a false description of such vessel, to
be registered or recorded, shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand
dollars, and be rendered incapable of serving in any office of trust or
profit under the United States. (R. S., 4187.)

If any person authorized and required by this Title [R. S., 4131-4305]
to perform, as an officer, any act or thing, willfully neglects to do or
perform the same, according to the true intent and meaning of this
Title, he shall, if not subject to the penalty and disqualification
prescribed in the preceding section, be punishable by a fine of five
hundred dollars for the first offense, and by a like fine for the second
offense, and shall thenceforth be rendered incapable of holding any
office of trust or profit under the United States. (R. S., 4188.)

Whenever any certificate of registry, enrollment, or license, or other
record or document granted in lieu thereof, to any vessel, is knowingly
and fraudulently obtained or used for any vessel not entitled to the
benefit thereof, such vessel, with her tackle, apparel, and furniture,
shall be liable to forfeiture. (R. S., 4187.)

No sea-letter or other document certifying or proving any vessel to be
the property of a citizen of the United States shall be issued, except
to vessels duly registered, or enrolled and licensed as vessels of the
United States, or to vessels which shall be wholly owned by citizens of
the United States, and furnished with or entitled to sea-letters or
other custom-house documents. (R. S., 4190.)

Every person who knowingly makes, utters, or publishes any false
sea-letter, Mediterranean passport, or certificate of registry, or who
knowingly avails himself of any such Mediterranean passport, sea-letter,
or certificate of registry, shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than five thousand dollars, and, if an officer of the United States,
shall thenceforth be incapable of holding any office of trust or profit
under the authority of the United States. (R. S., 4191.)


Provisions and water.

Should any master or owner of any merchant vessel of the United States
neglect to provide a sufficient quantity of stores to last for a voyage
of ordinary duration to the port of destination, and in consequence of
such neglect the crew are compelled to accept a reduced scale, such
master or owner shall be liable to a penalty as provided in section
forty-five hundred and sixty-eight of the Revised Statutes. (R. S.,
4564. Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 12.)

Any three or more of the crew of any merchant-vessel of the United
States bound from a port in the United States to any foreign port, or
being of the burden of seventy-five tons or upward, and bound from a
port on the Atlantic to a port on the Pacific, or vice versa, may
complain to any officer in command of any of the vessels of the United
States Navy, or consular officer of the United States, or
shipping-commissioner or chief officer of the customs, that the
provisions or water for the use of the crew are, at any time, of bad
quality, unfit for use, or deficient in quantity. Such officer shall
thereupon examine the provisions or water, or cause them to be examined;
and if, on examination, such provisions or water are found to be of bad
quality and unfit for use, or to be deficient in quantity, the person
making such examination shall certify the same in writing to the master
of the ship. If such master does not thereupon provide other proper
provisions or water, where the same can be had, in lieu of any so
certified to be of a bad quality and unfit for use, or does not procure
the requisite quantity of any so certified to be insufficient in
quantity, or uses any provisions or water which have been so certified
as aforesaid to be of bad quality and unfit for use, he shall, in every
such case, be liable to a penalty of not more than one hundred dollars;
and upon every such examination the officers making or directing the
same shall enter a statement of the result of the examination in the
log-book, and shall send a report thereof to the district judge for the
judicial district embracing the port to which such vessel is bound; and
such report shall be received in evidence in any legal proceedings. (R.
S., 4565.)

If the officer to whom any such complaint in regard to the provisions or
the water is made certifies in such statement that there was no
reasonable ground for such complaint, each of the parties so complaining
shall forfeit to the master or owner his share of the expense, if any,
of the survey. [This section shall not apply to fishing or whaling
vessels or yachts—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26.] (R. S., 4566. Dec. 21, 1898;
sec. 13.)

If any seamen, while on board any vessel, shall state to the master that
they desire to make complaint, in accordance with the two preceding
sections, in regard to the provisions or the water, to a competent
officer, against the master, the master shall, if the vessel is then at
a place where there is any such officer, so soon as the service of the
vessel will permit, and if the vessel is not then at such a place, so
soon after her first arrival at such place as the service of the vessel
will permit, allow such seamen, or any of them, to go ashore, or shall
send them ashore, in proper custody, so that they may be enabled to make
such complaint; and shall, in default, be liable to a penalty of not
more than one hundred dollars. (R. S., 4567.)

If, during a voyage, the allowance of any of the provisions which any
seaman is entitled to under section forty-six hundred and twelve of the
Revised Statutes is reduced except for any time during which such seamen
willfully and without sufficient cause refuses or neglects to perform
his duty, or is lawfully under confinement for misconduct either on
board or on shore; or if it shall be shown that any of such provisions
are, or have been during the voyage, bad in quality or unfit for use,
the seaman shall receive, by way of compensation for such reduction or
bad quality, according to the time of its continuance, the following
sums, to be paid to him in addition to and to be recoverable as wages:

 _First._ If his allowance is reduced by any quantity not exceeding
 one-third of the quantity specified by law, a sum not exceeding fifty
 cents a day.

 _Second._ If his allowance is reduced by more than one-third of such
 quantity, a sum not exceeding one dollar a day.

 _Third._ In respect to bad quality, a sum not exceeding one dollar a
 day.

But if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court before which the
case is tried that any provisions, the allowance of which has been
reduced, could not be procured or supplied in sufficient quantities, or
were unavoidably injured or lost, or if by reason of its innate
qualities any article becomes unfit for use and that proper and
equivalent substitutes were supplied in lieu thereof, the court shall
take such circumstances into consideration and shall modify or refuse
compensation, as the justice of the case may require. [This section
shall not apply to fishing or whaling vessels or yachts—Dec. 21, 1898,
sec. 26.] (R. S., 4568. Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 14.)


Weights and measures.

Every master shall keep on board proper weights and measures for the
purpose of determining the quantities of the several provisions and
articles served out, and shall allow the same to be used at the time of
serving out such provisions and articles, in the presence of a witness,
whenever any dispute arises about such quantities, and in default shall,
for every offense, be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty
dollars. (R. S., 4571.)


Medicines and anti-scorbutics.

Every vessel belonging to a citizen of the United States, bound from a
port in the United States to any foreign port, or being of the burden of
seventy-five tons or upward, and bound from a port on the Atlantic to a
port on the Pacific, or vice versa, shall be provided with a chest of
medicines; and every sailing-vessel bound on a voyage across the
Atlantic or Pacific Ocean, or around Cape Horn, or the Cape of Good
Hope, or engaged in the whale or other fisheries, or in sealing, shall
also be provided with, and cause to be kept, a sufficient quantity of
lime or lemon juice, and also sugar and vinegar or other
anti-scorbutics, to be served out to every seaman as follows: The master
of every such vessel shall serve the lime or lemon juice, and sugar and
vinegar, to the crew, within ten days after salt provisions mainly have
been served out to the crew, and so long afterward as such consumption
of salt provisions continues; the lime or lemon juice and sugar daily at
the rate of half an ounce each per day; and the vinegar weekly at the
rate of half a pint per week for each member of the crew. (R. S., 4569.)

If, on any such vessel, such medicines, medical stores, lime or lemon
juice, or other articles, sugar, and vinegar, as are required by the
preceding section, are not provided and kept on board, as required, the
master or owner shall be liable to a penalty of not more than five
hundred dollars; and if the master of any such vessel neglects to serve
out the lime or lemon juice, and sugar and vinegar in the case and
manner directed, he shall for each such offense be liable to a penalty
of not more than one hundred dollars; and if any master is convicted in
either of the offenses mentioned in this section, and it appears that
the offense is owing to the act or default of the owner, such master may
recover the amount of such penalty, and the costs incurred by him, from
the owner. (R. S., 4570.)


Slop chest.

Every such vessel [R. S., 4569] except vessels engaged in the whaling or
fishing business shall also be provided with a slop-chest, which shall
contain a complement of clothing for the intended voyage for each seaman
employed, including boots or shoes, hats, or caps, under clothing and
outer clothing, oiled clothing, and everything necessary for the wear of
a seaman; also a full supply of tobacco and blankets. Any of the
contents of the slop-chest shall be sold, from time to time, to any or
every seaman applying therefor, for his own use, at a profit not
exceeding ten per centum of the reasonable wholesale value of the same
at the port at which the voyage commenced. And if any such vessel is not
provided, before sailing, as herein required, the owner shall be liable
to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to vessels plying between the United States
and the Dominion of Canada, Newfoundland, the Bermuda Islands, the
Bahama Islands, the West Indies, Mexico and Central America. (June 26,
1884; sec. 11. June 19, 1886; sec. 13.)


Warmth and clothing.

Every vessel bound on any foreign voyage exceeding in length fourteen
days shall also be provided with at least one suit of woolen clothing
for each seaman, and every vessel in the foreign or domestic trade shall
provide a safe and warm room for the use of seamen in cold weather.
Failure to make such provision shall subject the owner or master to a
penalty of not less than one hundred dollars. [This section shall not
apply to fishing or whaling vessels or yachts—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26.]
(R. S., 4572; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 15.)


Log-book.

Every vessel making voyages from a port in the United States to any
foreign port, or being of the burden of seventy-five tons, or upward,
from a port on the Atlantic to a port on the Pacific, or vice versa,
shall have an official log-book; and every master of such vessel shall
make, or cause to be made therein, entries of the following matters,
that is to say:

 _First._ Every legal conviction of any member of his crew, and the
 punishment inflicted.

 _Second._ Every offense committed by any member of his crew for which
 it is intended to prosecute, or to enforce a forfeiture, together with
 such statement concerning the reading over such entry, and concerning
 the reply, if any, made to the charge, as is required by the provisions
 of section forty-five hundred and ninety-seven.

 _Third._ Every offense for which punishment is inflicted on board, and
 the punishment inflicted.

 _Fourth._ A statement of the conduct, character, and qualifications of
 each of his crew; or a statement that he declines to give an opinion of
 such particulars.

 _Fifth._ Every case of illness or injury happening to any member of the
 crew, with the nature thereof, and the medical treatment.

 _Sixth._ Every case of death happening on board, with the cause thereof.

 _Seventh._ Every birth happening on board, with the sex of the infant,
 and the names of the parents.

 _Eighth._ Every marriage taking place on board, with the names and ages
 of the parties.

 _Ninth._ The name of every seaman or apprentice who ceases to be a
 member of the crew otherwise than by death, with the place, time,
 manner, and cause thereof.

 _Tenth._ The wages due to any seaman or apprentice who dies during the
 voyage, and the gross amount of all deductions to be made therefrom.

 _Eleventh._ The sale of the effects of any seaman or apprentice who
 dies during the voyage, including a statement of each article sold, and
 the sum received for it.

 _Twelfth._ In every case of collision in which it is practicable so to
 do, the master shall, immediately after the occurrence, cause a
 statement thereof, and of the circumstances under which the same
 occurred, to be entered in the official log-book. Such entry shall be
 made in the manner prescribed in section forty-two hundred and
 ninety-one, and failure to make such entry shall subject the offender
 to the penalties prescribed by section forty-two hundred and
 ninety-two. (R. S., 4290; Feb. 14, 1900.)

Every entry hereby required to be made in the official log-book shall be
signed by the master and by the mate, or some other one of the crew, and
every entry in the official log-book shall be made as soon as possible
after the occurrence to which it relates, and, if not made on the same
day as the occurrence to which it relates, shall be made and dated so as
to show the date of the occurrence, and of the entry respecting it; and
in no case shall any entry therein, in respect of any occurrence
happening previously to the arrival of the vessel at her final port, be
made more than twenty-four hours after such arrival. (R. S., 4291.)

If in any case the official log-book is not kept in the manner hereby
required, or if any entry hereby directed to be made in any such
log-book is not made at the time and in the manner hereby directed, the
master shall, for each such offense, be liable to a penalty of not more
than twenty-five dollars; and every person who makes, or procures to be
made, or assists in making, any entry in any official log-book in
respect of any occurrence happening previously to the arrival of the
vessel at her final port of discharge, more than twenty-four hours after
such arrival, shall, for each offense, be liable to a penalty of not
more than one hundred and fifty dollars. (R. S., 4292.)




CHAPTER III

ENTRY AND CLEARANCE


Clearance.

The master or person having the charge or command of any vessel bound to
a foreign port, shall deliver to the collector of the district from
which such vessel is about to depart, a manifest of all the cargo on
board the same, and the value thereof, by him subscribed, and shall
swear to the truth thereof; whereupon the collector shall grant a
clearance for such vessel and her cargo, but without specifying the
particulars thereof in the clearance, unless required by the master or
other person having the charge or command of such vessel so to do. If
any vessel bound to a foreign port departs on her voyage to such foreign
port without delivering such manifest and obtaining a clearance, as
hereby required, the master or other person having the charge or command
of such vessel shall be liable to a penalty of five hundred dollars for
every such offense. (R. S., 4197; Apr. 29, 1902.)


Master's oath.

The oath to be taken by the master or commander of the vessel shall be
as follows:

 District of

 I, (insert the name), master or commander of the (insert the
 denomination and name of the vessel), bound from the port of (insert
 the name of the port or place sailing from) to (insert the name of the
 port or place bound to), do solemnly, sincerely, and truly swear (or
 affirm, as the case may be) that the manifest of the cargo on board the
 said (insert denomination and name of the vessel) now delivered by me
 to the collector of this district, and subscribed with my name
 contains, according to the best of my knowledge and belief, a full,
 just, and true account of all the goods, wares, and merchandise now
 actually laden on board the said vessel, and of the value thereof; and
 if any other goods, wares, or merchandise shall be laden or put on
 board the said (insert denomination and name of vessel) previous to her
 sailing from this port, I will immediately report the same to the said
 collector. I do also swear (or affirm) that I verily believe the duties
 on all the foreign merchandise therein specified have been paid or
 secured, according to law, and that no part thereof is intended to be
 relanded within the United States, and that if by distress or other
 unavoidable accident it shall become necessary to reland the same, I
 will forthwith make a just and true report thereof to the collector of
 the customs of the district wherein such distress or accident may
 happen. So help me God. (R. S., 4198; Apr. 29, 1902.)


Form of outward manifest.

The form of the report and manifest to be delivered to the collector
shall be as follows: (R. S., 4199; Apr. 29, 1902.)

 Report and manifest of the cargo laden at the port of          , on
 board the          ,           master, bound for port          .

 --------+----------+-------------+-------------+--------------
  Marks. | Numbers. | Packages or | Contents or | Value at the
         |          |  articles   | quantities. |   port of
         |          |  in bulk.   |             | exportation.
 --------+----------+-------------+-------------+--------------
         |          |             |             |
         |          |             |             |
         |          |             |             |
 --------+----------+-------------+-------------+--------------

Before a clearance shall be granted for any vessel bound to a foreign
port, the owners, shippers, or consignors of the cargo of such vessel
shall deliver to the collector manifests of the cargo, or the parts
thereof shipped by them respectively, and shall verify the same by oath.
Such manifests shall specify the kinds and quantities of the articles
shipped respectively, and the value of the total quantity of each kind
of articles; and the oath to each manifest shall state that it contains
a full, just, and true account of all articles laden on board of such
vessel by the owners, shippers, or consignors respectively, and that the
values of such articles are truly stated, according to their actual
cost, or the values which they truly bear at the port and time of
exportation. And before a clearance shall be granted for any such
vessel, the master of that vessel, and the owners, shippers, and
consignors of the cargo, shall state, upon oath, to the collector, the
foreign port or country in which such cargo is truly intended to be
landed. The oaths shall be taken and subscribed in writing. (R. S.,
4200; Apr. 29, 1902.)


Form of clearance.

The form of a clearance, to be granted to a ship or vessel on her
departure to a foreign port or place, shall be as follows:

 District of          ,
 Port of          .

 These are to certify all whom it doth concern, that          , master
 or commander of the          , burden      tons, or thereabouts,
 mounted with      guns, navigated with      men,      built, and bound
 for          , having on board     , hath here entered and cleared his
 said vessel according to law. Given under our hands and seals, at the
 custom-house of          , this      day of     , one thousand     ,
 and in the      year of the Independence of the United States of
 America. (R. S., 4201; Apr. 29, 1902.)


State inspection laws.

The collectors and other officers of the customs shall pay due regard to
the inspection laws of the States in which they may respectively act, in
such manner that no vessel having on board goods liable to inspection
shall be cleared until the master, or other proper person, shall have
produced such certificate that all such goods have been duly inspected,
as the laws of the respective States may require to be produced to
collectors or other officers of the customs. (R. S., 4202; Apr. 29,
1902.)


Manifests in Alaskan and insular trades.

The provisions of sections four thousand one hundred and ninety-seven to
four thousand two hundred, inclusive, of the Revised Statutes of the
United States, requiring statements of quantity and value of goods
carried by vessels clearing from the United States to foreign ports,
shall be extended to and govern, under such regulations as the Secretary
of Commerce shall prescribe, in the trade between the United States and
Hawaii, Porto Rico, Alaska, the Philippine Islands, Guam, and its other
noncontiguous territory, and shall also govern in the trade conducted
between said islands and territory, and in shipments from said islands
or territory to other parts of the United States: _Provided_, That this
law shall not apply in the Philippine Islands during such time as the
collectors of customs of those islands are under the jurisdiction of the
War Department. (Apr. 29, 1902; Feb. 14, 1903; secs. 7, 10.)


Bullion and coin.

All vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, and bound from
any port in the United States to any other port therein, or to any
foreign port, or from any foreign port to any port in the United States,
shall, before clearance, receive on board all such bullion, coin, United
States notes and bonds and other securities, as the Government of the
United States or any department thereof, or any minister, consul,
vice-consul, or commercial or other agent of the United States abroad,
shall offer, and shall securely convey and promptly deliver the same to
the proper authorities or consignees, on arriving at the port of
destination; and shall receive for such service such reasonable
compensation as may be allowed to other carriers in the ordinary
transactions of business. (R. S., 4204.)


Fees.

Previous to a clearance being granted to any vessel, outward bound, the
legal fees which shall have accrued on such vessel shall be paid at the
offices where such fees are respectively payable; and receipts for the
same shall be produced to the collector or other officer whose duty it
may be to grant clearances, before a clearance is granted. (R. S., 4206;
June 19, 1886.)

Whenever any clearance is granted to any vessel of the United States,
duly registered as such, and bound on any foreign voyage, the collector
of the district shall annex thereto, in every case, a copy of the rates
or tariffs of fees which diplomatic and consular officers are entitled,
by the regulations prescribed by the President, to receive for their
service. (R. S., 4207.)


Deposit of papers.

The register, or other document in lieu thereof, together with the
clearance and other papers granted by the officers of the customs to a
vessel at her departure from the port from whence she may have arrived,
Mediterranean passports excepted, shall previous to entry be produced to
the collector with whom such entry is to be made, and shall remain in
his office; and on the clearance of such vessel the register and other
documents shall be returned to the master or owner of such vessel. (R.
S., 2790.)

The register, or other document in lieu thereof, together with the
clearance and other papers granted by the officers of the customs to any
foreign vessel, at her departure from the port from which she may have
arrived, shall, previous to entry in any port of the United States, be
produced to the collector with whom such entry is to be made. It shall
be the duty of the master, within forty-eight hours after such entry, to
deposit the papers with the consul or vice-consul of the nation to which
the vessel belongs, and to deliver to the collector the certificate of
such consul or vice-consul that the papers have been so deposited. Every
master who fails to comply with this regulation shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars, nor more than two thousand
dollars. (R. S., 4209.)

It shall be the duty of all masters of vessels for whom any official
services shall be performed by any consular officer, without the payment
of a fee, to require a written statement of such services from such
consular officer, and, after certifying as to whether such statement is
correct, to furnish it to the collector of the district in which such
vessels shall first arrive on their return to the United States; and if
any such master of a vessel shall fail to furnish such statement, he
shall be liable to a fine of not exceeding fifty dollars, unless such
master shall state under oath that no such statement was furnished him
by said consular officer. And it shall be the duty of every collector to
forward to the Secretary of the Treasury all such statements as shall
have been furnished to him, and also a statement of all certified
invoices which shall have come to his office, giving the dates of the
certificates, and the names of the persons for whom and of the consular
officer by whom the same were certified. (R. S., 4213; June 26, 1884;
sec. 13.)


War documents; passports; sea letters.

Every vessel of the United States, going to any foreign country, shall,
before she departs from the United States, at the request of the master,
be furnished by the collector for the district where such vessel may be,
with a passport, the form for which shall be prescribed by the Secretary
of State. In order to be entitled to such passport, the master of every
such vessel shall be bound, with sufficient sureties, to the Treasurer
of the United States, in the penalty of two thousand dollars,
conditioned that the passport shall not be applied to the use or
protection of any other vessel than the one described in it; and that,
in case of the loss or sale of any vessel having such passport, the same
shall, within three months, be delivered up to the collector from whom
it was received, if the loss or sale take place within the United
States; or within six months, if the same shall happen at any place
nearer than the Cape of Good Hope; and within eighteen months, if at a
more distant place. (R. S., 4306.)

If any vessel of the United States shall depart therefrom, and shall be
bound to any foreign country, other than to some port in America,
without such passport, the master of such vessel shall be liable to a
penalty of two hundred dollars for every such offense. (R. S., 4307.)

Every unregistered vessel owned by a citizen of the United States, and
sailing with a sea-letter, going to any foreign country, shall, before
she departs from the United States, at the request of the master, be
furnished by the collector of the district where such vessel may be with
a passport, for which the master shall be subject to the rules and
conditions prescribed for vessels of the United States. (R. S., 4308.)

Every master of a vessel, belonging to citizens of the United States,
who shall sail from any port of the United States, shall, on his arrival
at a foreign port, deposit his register, sea-letter, and Mediterranean
passport with the consul, vice-consul, commercial agent, or
vice-commercial agent, if any there be at such port; and it shall be the
duty of such consul, vice-consul, commercial agent, or vice-commercial
agent, on such master or commander producing to him a clearance from the
proper officer of the port where his vessel may be, to deliver to the
master all of his papers, if such master or commander has complied with
the provisions of law relating to the discharge of seamen in a foreign
country, and to the payment of the fees of consular officers. (R. S.,
4309.)

Every master of any such vessel who refuses or neglects to deposit the
papers as required by the preceding section, shall be liable to a
penalty of five hundred dollars, to be recovered by such consul, vice
consul, commercial agent, or vice-commercial agent, in his own name, for
the benefit of the United States, in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (R. S., 4310.)


Illegal boarding of vessel.

Every person who, not being in the United States service, and not being
duly authorized by law for the purpose, goes on board any vessel about
to arrive at the place of her destination, before her actual arrival,
and before she has been completely moored, without permission of the
master, shall, for every such offense, be punishable by a fine of not
more than two hundred dollars, and by imprisonment for not more than six
months; and the master of such vessel may take any such person so going
on board into custody, and deliver him up forthwith to any constable or
police officer, to be by him taken before any justice of the peace, to
be dealt with according to the provisions of this Title (R. S.,
4501-4613). (R. S., 4606.)

The Secretary of Commerce is hereby authorized and directed to prescribe
from time to time and enforce regulations governing the boarding of
vessels arriving at the seaports of the United States, before such
vessels have been properly inspected and placed in security, and for
that purpose to employ any of the officers of that [or Treasury]
Department. (Mar. 31, 1900; Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)

Each person violating such regulations shall be subject to a penalty of
not more than one hundred dollars or imprisonment not to exceed six
months, or both, in the discretion of the court. (Mar. 31, 1900; sec. 2.)

This Act shall be construed as supplementary to section nine of chapter
three hundred and seventy-four of the Statutes of eighteen hundred and
eighty two, and section forty-six hundred and six of the Revised
Statutes. (Sec. 3.)


Boarding and search of vessel.

It shall be lawful for any officer of the customs, including inspectors
and occasional inspectors, or of a revenue-cutter, or authorized agent
of the Treasury Department, or other person specially appointed for the
purpose in writing by a collector, naval officer, or surveyor, to go on
board of any vessel, as well without as within his district, and to
inspect, search, and examine the same, and any person, trunk, or
envelope on board, and to this end to hail and stop such vessel if under
way, and to use all necessary force to compel compliance; and if it
shall appear that any breach or violation of the laws of the United
States has been committed, whereby or in consequence of which such
vessel, or the merchandise, or any part thereof, on board of or imported
by such vessel, is liable to forfeiture, to make seizure of the same, or
either or any part thereof, and to arrest, or in case of escape, or any
attempt to escape, to pursue and arrest any person engaged in such
breach or violation. (R. S., 3059.)

The original appointment in writing of any person specially appointed
under the provisions of the previous section shall be filed in the
custom-house where such appointment is made. (R. S., 3060.)

It shall be lawful for all collectors, naval officers, surveyors,
inspectors, and the officers of the revenue-cutters, to go on board of
vessels in any port of the United States, or within four leagues of the
coast thereof, if bound to the United States, whether in or out of their
respective districts, for the purpose of demanding the manifests, and of
examining and searching the vessels; and those officers respectively
shall have free access to the cabin and every part of a vessel. (R. S.,
3067.)

If any master of a vessel coming into or having arrived at any port
within the United States, shall obstruct or hinder or shall
intentionally cause any obstructions or hindrance to any officer in
lawfully going on board such vessel for the purpose of carrying into
effect any of the revenue laws of the United States, he shall for every
such offense be liable to a penalty of not more than five hundred
dollars nor less than fifty dollars. (R. S., 3068.)

If any box, trunk, chest, cask, or other package shall be found in the
cabin, steerage, or forecastle of a vessel, or in any other place
separate from the residue of the cargo, the officer of the customs shall
take a particular account of such package, and of the marks and numbers
thereof, if any, and a description thereof, and, if he judges proper,
shall seal every such package; and such account and description shall be
by him forwarded without delay to the collector of the district to which
such vessel is bound. If upon her arrival at the port of her entry, the
packages so described, or any of them, are missing, or if any seal put
thereon has been broken, the master shall be liable to a penalty for
every package missing, or on which any seal shall be broken, of two
hundred dollars. (R. S., 3069.)




CHAPTER IV

ENTRY OF MERCHANDISE


Inward manifests.

No merchandise shall be brought into the United States, from any foreign
port, in any vessel unless the master has on board manifests in writing
of the cargo, signed by such master. (R. S., 2806.)

Every manifest required by the preceding section shall contain:

 _First._ The name of the ports where the merchandise in such manifest
 mentioned were taken on board, and the ports within the United States
 for which the same are destined; particularly noting the merchandise
 destined for each port respectively. (R. S., 2807.)

 _Provided, however_, That the master of a vessel laden exclusively
 either with sugar, coal, salt, hides, dyewoods, wool, or jute butts,
 consigned to one consignee, arriving at a port for orders, may be
 permitted to destine such cargo or determine its disposition "for
 orders," upon entering the vessel at the custom-house, and, within
 fifteen days afterward and before the unloading of any part of the
 cargo, to amend the manifest by designating the actual port of
 discharge of such cargo:

 _Provided further_, That in the event of failure to designate the port
 of discharge within fifteen days such cargo must be discharged at the
 port where the vessel entered. (June 3, 1892.)

 _Second._ The name, description, and build of the vessel; the true
 admeasurement or tonnage thereof; the port to which such vessel
 belongs; the name of each owner, according to the register of the same;
 and the name of the master of such vessel.

 _Third._ A just and particular account of all the merchandise, so laden
 on board, whether in packages or stowed loose, of any kind or nature
 whatever, together with the marks and numbers as marked on each
 package, and the number or quantity and description of the packages in
 words at length, whether leaguer, pipe, butt, puncheon, hogshead,
 barrel, keg, case, bale, pack, truss, chest, box, band-box, bundle,
 parcel, cask, or package, of any kind or sort, describing the same by
 its usual name or denomination.

 _Fourth._ The names of the persons to whom such packages are
 respectively consigned, agreeably to the bills of lading signed for the
 same, unless when the goods are consigned to order, when it shall be so
 expressed in the manifest.

 _Fifth._ The names of the several passengers on board the vessel,
 distinguishing whether cabin or steerage passengers, or both, with
 their baggage, specifying the number and description of packages
 belonging to each respectively. (R. S., 2807.)

 _Sixth._ An account of the sea-stores remaining, if any.

If merchandise shall be imported, destined to be delivered in different
districts or ports, the quantities and packages so destined to be
delivered shall be inserted in successive order in the manifest; and all
spirits and wines constituting the whole or any part of the cargo of any
vessel shall also be inserted in successive order, distinguishing the
ports to which the same may be destined, and the kinds, qualities, and
quantities thereof. (R. S., 2808.)

If any merchandise is brought into the United States in any vessel
whatever from any foreign port without having such a manifest on board,
or which shall not be included or described in the manifest, or shall
not agree therewith, the master shall be liable to a penalty equal to
the value of such merchandise not included in such manifest; and all
such merchandise not included in the manifest belonging or consigned to
the master, mate, officers, or crew of such vessel, shall be forfeited.
(R. S., 2809.)

Whenever it is made to appear to the satisfaction of the collector,
naval officer, and surveyor, or to the major part of them, where those
officers are established at any port, or to the satisfaction of the
collector alone, where either of the other of the officers is not
established, or to the satisfaction of the court in which a trial shall
be had concerning such forfeiture, that no part of the cargo of any
vessel without proper manifest was unshipped, after it was taken on
board, except such as shall have been particularly specified and
accounted for in the report of the master, and that the manifests have
been lost or mislaid, without fraud or collusion, or were defaced by
accident, or became incorrect by mistake, no forfeiture or penalty shall
be incurred under the preceding section. (R. S., 2810.)


Ports of entry.

It shall not be lawful to make entry of any vessel which shall arrive
within the United States, from any foreign port, or of the cargo on
board such vessel, elsewhere than at one of the ports of entry
designated in chapter one [R. S., 2517-2612] of this Title [R. S.,
2517-3129]; nor to unlade the cargo, or any part thereof, elsewhere than
at one of the ports of delivery therein designated, except that every
port of entry shall be also a port of delivery. This section shall not
prevent the master or commander of any vessel from making entry with the
collector of any district in which such vessel may be owned, or from
which she may have sailed on the voyage from which she shall then have
returned. (R. S., 2770.)


Vessels bound to port of delivery.

The master of every vessel bound to a port of delivery only, in any
district, shall first come to at the port of entry of such district,
with his vessel, and there make report and entry in writing, and pay all
duties required by law, port fees and charges, before such vessel shall
proceed to her port of delivery. Any master of a vessel who shall
proceed to a port of delivery contrary to such directions shall be
liable to a penalty of five hundred dollars, to be recovered with costs
of suit. (R. S., 2772.)


Report and declaration of master.

Within twenty-four hours after the arrival of any vessel, from any
foreign port, at any port of the United States established by law, at
which an officer of the customs resides, or within any harbor, inlet, or
creek thereof, in the hours of business at the office of the chief
officer of the customs at such port will permit, or as soon thereafter
as such hours will permit, the master shall repair to such office, and
make report to the chief officer, of the arrival of the vessel; and he
shall, within forty-eight hours after such arrival, make a further
report in writing to the collector of the district, which report shall
be in the form, and shall contain all the particulars required to be
inserted in, and verified like, a manifest. Every master who shall
neglect or omit to make either of such reports and declarations, or to
verify any such declaration as required, or shall not fully comply with
the true intent and meaning of this section, shall, for each offense, be
liable to a penalty of one thousand dollars. (R. S., 2774.)

The master of any vessel having on board distilled spirits, or wines,
shall, within forty-eight hours after his arrival, whether the same be
at the first port of arrival of such vessel or not, in addition to the
requirements of the preceding section, report in writing to the surveyor
or officer acting as inspector of the revenue of the port at which he
has arrived, the foreign port from which he last sailed, the name of his
vessel, his own name, the tonnage and denomination of such vessel, and
to what nation belonging, together with the quantity and kinds of
spirits and wines, on board of the vessel, particularizing the number of
casks, vessels, cases, or other packages containing the same, with their
marks and numbers, as also the quantity and kinds of spirits and wines,
on board such vessel as sea-stores, and in default thereof he shall be
liable to a penalty of five hundred dollars and any spirits omitted to
be reported shall be forfeited. (R. S., 2775.)

If any vessel, having arrived within the limits of any collection-
district, from any foreign port, departs, or attempts to depart from the
same, unless to proceed on her way to some more interior district to
which she may be bound, before report or entry shall have been made by
the master with the collector of some district, the master shall be
liable to a penalty of four hundred dollars; and any collector, naval
officer, surveyor, or commander of any revenue cutter may cause such
vessel to be arrested and brought back to the most convenient port of
the United States. If, however, it is made to appear by the oath of the
master, and of the person next in command, or by other sufficient proof
to the satisfaction of the collector of the district within which such
vessel shall afterward come, or to the satisfaction of the court in
which the prosecution for such penalty may be had, that the departure or
attempt to depart was occasioned by stress of weather, pursuit or duress
of enemies, or other necessity, the penalty imposed by this section
shall not be incurred. (R. S., 2773.)


Special inward manifest for Treasury Department.

Each master of a vessel arriving in the United States from a foreign
port except vessels carrying traffic in bond on transfer ferries shall,
immediately upon landing and before entering his vessel at the
custom-house, mail to the Auditor for the Treasury Department,
Washington, a true copy of the manifest of his vessel, and shall on
entering his vessel make affidavit that he has mailed such copy and that
the same is true and correct; and he shall also mail to the said Auditor
a true copy of the corrected manifest filed on any post entry of his
vessel. Any master who neglects or refuses to mail to the Auditor the
required copy of the original or corrected manifest shall be subject to
the same fines and penalties fixed by law for his failure to deliver the
manifest of his vessel to the collector: _Provided_, That this section
shall not apply to ports where there is a naval officer. (Mar. 2, 1895;
sec. 9.)


Cargo in bulk.

Vessels arriving at a port of entry in the United States, laden with
coal, salt, railroad iron and other like articles in bulk may proceed to
places within that collection district to be specially designated by the
Secretary of the Treasury by general regulations or otherwise, under the
superintendence of customs officers, at the expense of the parties
interested, for the purpose of unlading cargoes of the character before
mentioned. (R. S., 2776; June 26, 1884; sec. 29.)


Bond of cargo for re-export.

Any vessel may proceed with any merchandise brought in her, and, in the
manifest delivered to the collector of the customs, reported as destined
for any foreign port, from the district within which such vessel shall
first arrive to such foreign port without paying or securing the payment
of any duties upon such merchandise as shall be actually re-exported in
the vessel. But the manifest so declaring to re-export such merchandise
shall be delivered to such collector within forty-eight hours after the
arrival of the vessel. And the master of such vessel shall give bond as
required by the next section. (R. S., 2776.)

The master of any vessel so destined for a foreign port shall give bond,
with one or more sureties, in a sum equal to the amount of the duties
upon the merchandise, as the same shall be estimated by the collector
and naval officer of the port where the report shall be made, to the
satisfaction of the collector, with condition that the merchandise, or
any part thereof, shall not be landed within the United States, unless
due entry thereof shall have been first made and the duties thereupon
paid, according to law. Such bond shall be taken for the same period,
and canceled in like manner, as a bond given for obtaining drawback of
duties. No such bond shall be required in respect to merchandise on
board of any vessel which has put into the United States from a
necessity, shown as prescribed in section twenty-seven hundred and
seventy-three. (R. S., 2777.)

The collector receiving any bond conditioned for the payment of duties
upon merchandise reported as destined for a foreign port, in case the
same shall be landed within the United States, or any other bonds taken
upon the exportation of merchandise entitled to drawback, shall
immediately after the time when by the conditions of the same they ought
to be canceled, put the same in suit, provided the proof of the
occurrence of such a necessity as excuses a landing of such goods within
the United States has not been produced, or further time granted
therefor by the Secretary of the Treasury. (R. S., 2778.)


Inspection of merchandise laden for export.

The collector shall direct the surveyor, where any, to inspect, or cause
to be inspected, the merchandise notified for exportation, and if it is
found to correspond fully with the notice and proof concerning the same,
the collector, together with the naval officer, if any, shall grant a
permit for lading the same on board of the vessel named in such notice
and entry. Such lading shall be performed under the superintendence of
the officer by whom the same has been so inspected; and the exporter
shall make oath that the merchandise, so noticed for exportation, and
laden on board such vessel, previous to the clearance thereof, or within
ten days after such clearance, is truly intended to be exported to the
place whereof notice has been given, and is not intended to be relanded
within the United States; otherwise the merchandise shall not be
entitled to the benefit of drawback. (R. S., 3035.)


Transfer of imported merchandise for export.

All merchandise imported into the United States, the duties on which
have been paid, or secured to be paid, may be transported by land, or
partly by land and partly by water, or coastwise, from the district into
which it was imported to any port of entry and exported from such port
of entry with the benefit of drawback. (R. S., 3036.)


Delivery of cargo in various districts.

Any vessel in which any merchandise is brought into the United States
from any foreign port, and which is specified in the manifest verified
before the collector of the port in which such vessel first arrives, to
be destined for other districts, may proceed with the same from district
to district within the United States, in order to the landing or
delivery thereof; and the duties on such of the merchandise only as
shall be landed in any district shall be paid within such district. (R.
S., 2779.)

Before any vessel departs from the district in which she shall first
arrive for another district, provided such departure is not within
forty-eight hours after her arrival within such district, with
merchandise brought in such vessel from a foreign port on which the
duties have not been paid, the master shall obtain from the collector of
the district from which she is about to depart, who is hereby required
to grant the same, a copy of the report and manifest made by such
master, certified by the collector, to which copy shall be annexed a
certificate of the quantity and particulars of the merchandise which
appears to him to have been landed within his district, or of the
quantity and particulars of the merchandise which remains on board and
upon which the duties are to be paid in some other district. (R. S.,
2780.)

Within twenty-four hours after the arrival of such vessel within any
other district, the master shall make report or entry to or with the
collector of such other district, producing and showing the certified
copy of his first report, together with a certificate from each
collector of any other district within which any of the merchandise,
brought in such vessel, has been landed, of the quantity and particulars
of such merchandise as has been landed in each district respectively.
(R. S., 2781.)

The master shall, however, first give bond, with one or more sureties,
to the satisfaction of the collector of the district within which the
vessel first arrives, in a sum equal to the amount of the duties on the
residue of the merchandise, according to such estimate as the collector
shall form thereof, with condition that the residue of such merchandise
shall be duly entered and delivered in another district for which the
same has been reported to be destined. (R. S., 2782.)

The bond shall be canceled or discharged within six calendar months from
the date thereof, by the production of certificates from the collectors
of the districts for which the merchandise has been reported, showing
the due entry and delivery of the merchandise in such districts, or upon
due proof to the satisfaction of the collector by whom the bond was
taken, and to the naval officer of the port, if any, that such entry and
delivery were prevented by some unavoidable accident or casualty, and if
the whole or any part of the merchandise has not been lost, that it has
been duly entered and delivered within the United States. (R. S., 2783.)

If the master of any such vessel fails by his neglect or fault to obtain
the copy of his report from the collector of the district from which he
is about to depart, or any certificate which he ought to obtain, or
neglects to exhibit the same to the collector of any other district to
which the vessel afterward proceeds, within the time for that purpose
allowed, he shall be liable to a penalty, for every such neglect or
omission, of five hundred dollars. (R. S., 2784.)


Vessels exempt from entry.

It shall not be necessary for the master of any vessel of war, or of any
vessel employed by any prince, or state, as a public packet for the
conveyance of letters and dispatches, and not permitted by the laws of
such prince or state to be employed in the transportation of
merchandise, in the way of trade, to make report and entry. (R. S.,
2791.)

Any passenger vessel engaged triweekly or oftener in trade between ports
of the United States and foreign ports shall be exempt from entrance and
clearance fees and tonnage taxes while such service triweekly or oftener
is maintained. (May 28, 1908.)


Sea-stores.

In order to ascertain what articles ought to be exempt from duty as the
sea-stores of a vessel, the master shall particularly specify the
articles, in the report or manifest to be by him made, designating them
as the sea-stores of such vessel; and in the oath to be taken by such
master, on making such report, he shall declare that the articles so
specified as sea-stores are truly such, and are not intended by way of
merchandise or for sale; whereupon the articles shall be free from duty.
(R. S., 2795.)

Whenever it appears to the collector to whom a report and manifest of
sea-stores are delivered, together with the naval officer, where there
is one, or alone, where there is no naval officer, that the quantities
of the articles, or any part thereof, reported as sea-stores, are
excessive, the collector, jointly with the naval officer, or alone, as
the case may be, may in his discretion estimate the amount of the duty
on such excess; which shall be forthwith paid by the master, to the
collector, on pain of forfeiting the value of such excess. (R. S., 2796.)

If any other or greater quantity of articles are found on board such
vessel as sea-stores than are specified in an entry of sea-stores, or if
any of the articles are landed without a permit first obtained from the
collector, and naval officer if any, for that purpose, all such articles
as are not included in the report or manifest by the master, and all
which are landed without a permit, shall be forfeited, and may be
seized; and the master shall moreover be liable to a penalty of treble
the value of the articles omitted or landed. (R. S., 2797.)

Sea-stores and the legitimate equipment of vessels belonging to regular
lines plying between foreign ports and the United States delayed in port
for any cause may be transferred in such port of the United States under
the supervision of the customs officers from one vessel to another
vessel of the same owner without payment of duties, but duties must be
paid on such stores or equipments landed for consumption, except
American products. (Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 17.)


Coal.

The master of any vessel propelled by steam, arriving at any port in the
United States, may retain all the coal such vessel may have on board at
the time of her arrival, and may proceed with such coal to a foreign
port, without being required to land the same in the United States, or
to pay any duty thereon. (R. S., 2798.)


Inspection of inward manifests by boarding officer.

Every master of any vessel laden with merchandise, and bound to any port
in the United States shall, on his arrival within four leagues of the
coast thereof, or within any of the bays, harbors, ports, rivers,
creeks, or inlets, thereof, upon demand, produce the manifests in
writing, which such master is required to have on board his vessel, to
such officer of the customs as first comes on board his vessel, for
inspection, and shall deliver to such officer true copies thereof, which
copies shall be provided and subscribed by the master, and the officer
to whom the original manifests have been produced shall certify upon the
back thereof that the same were produced, and the day and year on which
the same were so produced, and that such copies were to him delivered
and by him examined with the original manifest; and shall likewise
certify upon the back of such copies the day and year on which the same
were delivered, and shall forthwith transmit such copies to the
respective collectors of the several districts, to which the goods by
such manifests appear respectively to be consigned. (R. S., 2811.)

The master of any such vessel shall in like manner produce to the
officer of the customs who first comes on board such vessel, upon her
arrival within the limits of any collection-district in which the cargo,
or any part thereof, is intended to be discharged or landed, for his
inspection, such manifest; and shall also deliver to him true copies
thereof, such copies also to be provided and subscribed by the master,
the production of which manifests and the delivery of which copies shall
also be certified by the officer of the customs, upon the back of the
original manifests, with the particular day and year when such manifests
were produced to such officer, and when he so received the copies
thereof; and such officer is required forthwith to transmit the copies
of the manifest to the collector of the district; and the master shall
afterward deliver the original manifests so certified to the collector.
When any manifest shall be produced, upon which there shall be no
certificate from any officer of the customs as before mentioned, the
master producing the same shall be required to make oath that no officer
has applied for, and that no indorsement has taken place on, any
manifest of the cargo of such vessel. (R. S., 2812.)

The master of any such vessel shall not be required to make delivery of
more than one copy of each manifest to the officer who shall first come
on board of such vessel, within four leagues of the coast of the United
States, and one other copy to such officer as shall first come on board
within the limits of any collection-district, for which the cargo of
such vessel, or some part thereof, is destined, nor to make delivery of
any such copy to any other officer; but it shall be sufficient, in
respect to any such other officer, to exhibit, to him the original
manifest and the certificates thereupon. (R. S., 2813.)

If the master of any vessel laden with merchandise, and bound to any
port in the United States, fails upon his arrival within four leagues of
the coast thereof, or within the limits of any collection-district,
where the cargo of such vessel, or any part thereof, is intended to be
discharged, to produce such manifests, as are heretofore required, in
writing, to the proper officer upon demand therefor, or to deliver such
copies thereof, according to the directions of the preceding, sections
or if he fails to give an account of the true destination of the vessel,
which he is hereby required to do, upon request of such officer, or
gives a false account of such destination, in order to evade the
production of the manifests, the master shall for every such neglect,
refusal, or offense, be liable to a penalty of not more than five
hundred dollars. If any officer first coming on board, in each case,
shall neglect or refuse to certify on the back of such manifests the
production thereof, and the delivery of such copies respectively as are
directed to be delivered to such officer, such officer shall be liable
to a penalty of five hundred dollars. (R. S., 2814.)

The officers who may apply to the master of any such vessel, respecting
any of the provisions in the preceding sections, and who shall not
receive full satisfaction therein, are hereby required to make a return
in writing of the name of the vessel and master so offending, in any or
all of the particulars required, as soon as possible, to the collector
of the district to which such vessel shall be considered to be bound.
(R. S., 2815.)

Collectors and surveyors, respectively, may, whenever they judge it to
be necessary for the security of the revenue, put an inspector of the
customs on board any vessel, to accompany the same until her arrival at
the first port of entry or delivery, in the district to which such
vessel may be destined. If the master of any vessel shall neglect or
omit to deposit a manifest as herein prescribed, or shall refuse to
receive an inspector of the customs on board, as the case requires, he
shall forfeit and pay five hundred dollars, to be recovered with cost of
suit, one-half for the use of the officer with whom such manifest ought
to have been deposited, and the other half to the use of the collector
of the district to which such vessel may be bound. If, however, the
manifest shall, in either of the above cases, have been previously
delivered to any officer of the customs, pursuant to the provisions
hereinafter made in that behalf, the depositing of a manifest shall not
be necessary. (R. S., 2834; Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 15.)


Entry of merchandise for different port of destination.

The importer, or his agent, may enter merchandise at the port of entry
for the collection-district into which it is to be imported in the usual
manner; and the collector shall grant a permit for the landing thereof,
and cause the duties to be ascertained as in other cases, the goods
remaining in the custody of the collector until reshipped for the place
of destination. The collector shall certify to the surveyor at such
place the amount of such duties, which the surveyor shall enter on the
margin of the bond given to secure the same; and the merchandise shall
be delivered by the collector to the agent of the importer or consignee,
duly authorized to receive the same, for shipment to the place of
destination. (R. S., 2826.)

The master or conductor of every vessel or vehicle in which such
merchandise shall be transported, shall, previously to departure from
the port of entry, deliver to the collector duplicate manifests of such
merchandise, specifying the marks and numbers of every case, bag, box,
chest, or package, containing the same, with the name and place of
residence of every importer or consignee of such merchandise, and the
quantity shipped to each, to be by him subscribed, and to the truth of
which he shall swear, and that the merchandise has been received on
board his vessel or vehicle, stating the name of the agent who shipped
the same; and the collector shall certify the facts, on the manifests,
one of which he shall return to the master, with a permit thereto
annexed, authorizing him to proceed to the place of his destination. (R.
S., 2827.)

If any vessel or vehicle having such merchandise on board shall depart
from the port of entry without having complied with the provisions of
the preceding section, the master or conductor thereof shall be liable
to a penalty of five hundred dollars. (R. S., 2828.)


Comparison of cargo and manifest.

The surveyor at the port of delivery shall cause the casks, bags, boxes,
chests, or packages, to be inspected, and compared with the manifests,
and the same being identified he shall grant a permit for unloading the
same, or such part thereof as the master or conductor shall request; and
when a part only of such merchandise is intended to be landed the
surveyor shall make an indorsement on the back of the manifests,
designating such part, specifying the articles to be landed, and shall
return the manifests to the master or conductor, indorsing thereon his
permission to such vessel or vehicle to proceed to the place of its
destination. (R. S., 2830.)


Illegal unlading.

If after the arrival of any vessel laden with merchandise and bound to
the United States, within the limits of any collection-district, or
within four leagues of the coast, any part of the cargo of such vessel
shall be unladen, for any purpose whatever, before such vessel has come
to the proper place for the discharge of her cargo, or some part
thereof, and has been there duly authorized by the proper officer of the
customs to unlade the same, the master of such vessel and the mate, or
other person next in command, shall respectively be liable to a penalty
of one thousand dollars for each such offense, and the merchandise so
unladen shall be forfeited, except in case of some unavoidable accident,
necessity, or distress of weather. In case of such unavoidable accident,
necessity, or distress, the master of such vessel shall give notice to,
and, together with two or more of the officers or mariners on board such
vessel, of whom the mate or other person next in command shall be one,
shall make proof upon oath before the collector, or other chief officer
of the customs of the district, within the limits of which such
accident, necessity, of distress happened, or before the collector, or
other chief officer to the collection-district, within the limits of
which such vessel shall first afterward arrive, if the accident,
necessity, or distress happened not within the limits of any district,
but within four leagues of the coast of the United States. The
collector, or other chief officer, is hereby authorized and required to
administer such oath. (R. S., 2867.)

If any merchandise, so unladen from on board any such vessel, shall be
put or received into any other vessel, except in the case of such
accident, necessity, or distress, to be so notified and proved, the
master of any such vessel into which the merchandise shall be so put and
received, and every other person aiding and assisting therein, shall be
liable to a penalty of treble the value of the merchandise, and the
vessel in which they shall be so put shall be forfeited. (R. S., 2868.)


Special permit to unlade by night and preliminary entry.

Upon arrival at any port in the United States of any vessel or other
conveyance from a foreign port or place, either directly or by way of
another port in the United States, or upon such arrival from another
port in the United States of any vessel or other conveyance belonging to
a line designated by the Secretary of the Treasury as a common carrier
of bonded merchandise, and, after due report and entry of such vessel in
accordance with existing law or due report, under such regulations as
the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, of the arrival of such
other conveyances, the collector of customs, with the concurrence of the
naval officer at ports where there is a naval officer, shall grant, upon
proper application therefor, a special license to lade or unlade the
cargo of any such vessel or other conveyance at night; that is to say,
between sunset and sunrise. (Sec. 1.)

The master of any vessel from a foreign port or place, upon arrival
within a customs collection district of the United States, bound to a
port of entry in such district, may make preliminary entry of the vessel
by making oath or affirmation to the truth of the statements contained
in his original manifest and delivering his said original manifest to
the customs officer who shall board such vessel within such district,
with a copy of said original manifest for the use of the naval officer
at ports where there is a naval officer; whereupon, upon arrival at the
wharf or place of discharge, the lading or unlading of the cargo of such
vessel may proceed, by both day and night, under such regulations as the
Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe. (Sec. 2.)

Before any such special license to lade or unlade at night shall be
granted and before any permit shall be issued for the immediate lading
or unlading of any such vessel after preliminary entry, as hereinbefore
provided, either by day or by night the master, owner, agent, or
consignee of such vessel or other conveyance shall make proper
application therefor and shall at the same time execute and deliver to
the United States, through the collector of customs, a good and
sufficient bond, in a penal sum to be approved by the said collector,
conditioned to indemnify and save the United States harmless from any
and all losses and liabilities which may occur or be occasioned by
reason of the granting of such special license or the issuing or
granting of such permit for immediate lading or unlading; or the master,
owner, agent, consignee, or probable consignee, as aforesaid, may
execute and deliver to the United States, in like manner and form, a
good and sufficient bond, in the panel sum of fifty thousand dollars,
conditioned to indemnify and save the United States harmless from any
and all losses and liabilities which may occur or be occasioned by
reason of the granting of such special licenses and the issuing or
granting of such permits for immediate lading or unlading by day and
night during a period of six months. (Sec. 3.)

Such application having been duly made and the required bond having been
duly executed and delivered, special license or licenses to lade or
unlade at night after regular entry of vessels, and due report of other
conveyances, may be granted, and a permit or permits may be issued for
the immediate lading and unlading, by day and night, of vessels admitted
to preliminary entry, or of other conveyances of which due report of
arrival has been made: _Provided_, That the provisions of this Act shall
extend and be applicable to any vessels or other conveyances bound to a
port of entry in the United States to be unladen at a port of delivery
or to be unladen at a place of discharge designated by the Secretary of
the Treasury under the provisions of section twenty-seven hundred and
seventy-six of the Revised Statutes as amended: _Provided further_, That
when preliminary entry of a vessel shall be made by the master as herein
provided he shall not be relieved from making due report and entry of
his vessel at the custom-house in accordance with existing law, and any
liability of the master or owner of any such vessel to the owner or
consignee of any merchandise landed from her shall not be affected by
the granting of such special license, but such liability shall continue
until the merchandise is properly removed from the dock whereon the same
may be landed. (Sec. 4.)

The Secretary of the Treasury shall fix a reasonable rate of extra
compensation for night services of inspectors, storekeepers, weighers
and other customs officers and employees in connection with the lading
or unlading of cargo at night, or the lading at night of cargo or
merchandise for transportation in bond or for exportation in bond, or
for the exportation with benefit of drawback, but such rate of
compensation shall not exceed an amount equal to double the rate of
compensation allowed to each such officer or employee for like services
rendered by day, the said extra compensation to be paid by the master,
owner, agent, or consignee of such vessel or other conveyance, whenever
such special license or permit for immediate lading or unlading or for
lading or unlading at night or on Sundays or holidays shall be granted,
to the collector of customs, who shall pay the same to the several
customs officers and employees entitled thereto according to the rates
fixed therefor by the Secretary of the Treasury. Customs officers acting
as boarding officers, and any customs officer who may be designated for
that purpose by the collector of customs, and hereby authorized to
administer the oath or affirmation herein provided for, and such
boarding officers shall be allowed extra compensation for services in
boarding vessels at night or on Sundays or holidays—at the rate
prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury as herein provided, the said
extra compensation to be paid by the master, owner, agent, or consignee
of such vessels. (R. S., 2871; June 30, 1906; Feb. 13, 1911; sec. 5.)


Unlading by day.

Except as authorized by the preceding section, no merchandise brought in
any vessel from any foreign port shall be unladen or delivered from such
vessel within the United States but in open day—that is to say, between
the rising and the setting of the sun—except by special license from the
collector of the port, and naval officer of the same, where there is
one, for that purpose, nor at any time without a permit from the
collector, and naval officer, if any, for such unlading or delivery. (R.
S., 2872.)

When the license to unload between the setting and rising of the sun is
granted to a sailing vessel under this section, a fixed, uniform, and
reasonable compensation may be allowed to the inspector or inspectors
for service between the setting and rising of the sun, under such
regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, to be
received by the collector from the master, owner, or consignee of the
vessel, and to be paid by him to the inspector or inspectors. (June 26,
1884; sec. 25.)

If any merchandise shall be unladen or delivered from any vessel
contrary to the preceding section, the master of such vessel, and every
other person who shall knowingly be concerned, or aiding therein, or in
removing, storing, or otherwise securing such merchandise, shall each be
liable to a penalty of four hundred dollars for each offense, and shall
be disabled from holding any office of trust or profit under the United
States, for a term not exceeding seven years; and the collector of the
district shall advertise the name of such person in a newspaper printed
in the State in which he resides, within twenty days after each
respective conviction. (R. S., 2873.)

All merchandise, so unladen or delivered contrary to the provisions of
section twenty-eight hundred and seventy-two, shall become forfeited,
and may be seized by any of the officers of the customs; and where the
value thereof, according to the highest market price of the same, at the
port or district where landed, shall amount to four hundred dollars, the
vessel, tackle, apparel, and furniture shall be subject to like
forfeiture and seizure. (R. S., 2874.)


Supervision of unlading.

The collector of any district at which any vessel arrives, immediately
on her first coming within such district, or the surveyor of any port
where such vessel is, may put and keep on board such vessel, while
remaining within such district, or in going from one district to
another, one or more inspectors to examine the cargo or contents of such
vessel, and to superintend the delivery thereof, or of so much thereof
as shall be delivered within the United States, and to perform such
other duties according to law, as they shall be directed by the
collector, or surveyor, to perform for the better securing the
collection of the duties. Only collectors shall have power, however, to
put inspectors on board vessels to go from one district to another. (R.
S., 2875.)

The inspector shall make known to the master of such vessel the duties
he is to perform; and shall suffer no merchandise to be unladen, or
otherwise removed from such vessel, without a permit in writing from the
collector of the port, and naval officer thereof, if any. The inspector
shall enter in a book, to be by him kept according to such a form as
shall be prescribed or approved by the collector, the name of the person
in whose behalf such permits are granted, together with the particulars
therein specified, and the marks, numbers, kinds, and description of the
respective packages which shall be unladen pursuant thereto, and shall
keep a like account in the book of all merchandise which, not having
been entered within the time limited by this Title [R. S., 2517-3129],
or for some other cause, has been sent to the store or warehouse
provided for the reception of such merchandise; such book shall be
delivered to the surveyor in the month of January in every year for his
inspection, and immediately after such inspection be transmitted by the
surveyor, with such observations as he may think necessary thereon, to
the collector, to be deposited in his office. (R. S., 2876.)

The inspector shall attend to the delivery of the cargo under his care,
at all times when the unlading or delivery of merchandise is lawful,
particularly from the rising to the setting of the sun on each day,
Sundays and the fourth day of July in each year excepted; for which
purpose he shall constantly attend and remain on board the vessel, the
deliveries from which he is to superintend, or at any other station
where his inspection is necessary. The inspector shall not quit such
station or place without the leave of the surveyor of the port first
obtained, who shall appoint another inspector, if he deems it necessary,
to supply the place of such inspector during his absence; and any
inspector who shall neglect or in any manner act contrary to the duties
hereby enjoined, shall for the first offense be liable to a penalty of
the sum of fifty dollars, and for the second offense shall be displaced,
and be incapable of holding any station of trust or profit under the
revenue laws of the United States, for a term not exceeding seven years.
(R. S., 2877.)

No inspector shall perform any other duties or service on board any
vessel, the superintendence of which is committed to him for any person
whatever, other than what is required by this Title [R. S., 2517-3129],
under the penalty of being disabled from acting any longer as an
inspector of the customs; the wages or compensation of such inspector as
may proceed from one district to another, shall be defrayed by the
master of the vessel committed to his care; every inspector or other
officer of the revenue, while performing any duty on board any vessel,
not in a port of the United States, discharging her cargo, shall be
entitled to receive from the master of such vessel such provisions and
accommodations as are usually supplied to passengers, or as the state
and condition of such vessel will admit, on receiving therefor fifty
cents a day; and any master of any vessel who shall refuse such
provisions and reasonable accommodations shall be liable to a penalty of
one hundred dollars. (R. S., 2878.)

If, by reason of the delivery of the cargo in several districts, more
than the term allowed by law shall in the whole be spent therein, the
wages or compensation of the inspector who may be employed on board of
any vessel, in respect to which such term may be so exceeded, shall, for
every day of such excess, be paid by the master or owner; and the
inspector shall, previously to the clearance of the vessel, render an
exact account to the collector of all such compensation as has been
paid, or is due and payable by the master or owner. (R. S., 2879.)

The inspector who may be put on board of any vessel shall secure, after
sunset in each evening, or previous to his quitting the vessel, the
hatches and other communications with the hold of such vessel, or any
other part thereof he may judge necessary, with locks or other proper
fastenings, which locks or other fastenings shall not be opened, broken,
or removed until the morning following, or after the rising of the sun,
and in the presence of the inspector by whom the same were affixed,
except by special license from the collector of the port, and the naval
officer, if any, first obtained. If the locks or other fastenings, or
any of them, are broken or removed contrary to this section, or, if any
merchandise or packages are clandestinely landed, notice thereof shall
be immediately given by the inspector to the collector and naval
officer, if any, of the port where the vessel may be; and the master of
such vessel shall, for each or every such offense, be liable to a
penalty of five hundred dollars. (R. S., 3070.)

Merchandise shall not be entered or delivered from customs custody
elsewhere than at one of the ports of entry hereinbefore designated,
except at the expense of the parties in interest, upon express authority
from the Secretary of the Treasury and under conditions to be prescribed
by him. When it shall be made to appear to the Secretary of the Treasury
that the interests of commerce or the protection of the revenues so
require, he may cause to be stationed at places in the various
collection districts, though not named as ports of entry, officers or
employees of the customs with authority to enter and clear vessels, to
accept entries of merchandise, to collect duties, and to enforce the
various provisions of the customs and navigation laws. (See Appendix A.)
(Executive order; Mar. 3, 1913.)


Limit of time for unlading.

Whenever any merchandise shall be imported into any port of the United
States from any foreign port, in any vessel, at the expiration of ten
working days if the vessel is less than five hundred tons register, and
within fifteen working days if it is of five hundred tons register and
less than one thousand, and within twenty working days if it is of one
thousand tons register and less than fifteen hundred, and within
twenty-five working days if it is of fifteen hundred tons register and
upward, not including legal holidays and days when the condition of the
weather prevents the unlading of the vessel with safety to its cargo,
after the time within which the report of the master of any vessel is
required to be made to the collector of the district, if there is found
any merchandise other than has been reported for some other district or
some foreign port, the collector shall take possession thereof; but with
the consent of the owner or consignee of any merchandise, or with the
consent of the owner or master of the vessel in which the same may be
imported, the merchandise may be taken possession of by the collector
after one day's notice to the collector of the district. All merchandise
so taken shall be delivered pursuant to the order of the collector of
the district, for which a certificate or receipt shall be granted. (R.
S., 2880; May 9, 1896.)

The limitation of time for unlading, prescribed by the preceding
section, shall not extend to vessels laden exclusively with coal, salt,
sugar, hides, dyewoods, wool, or jute butts, consigned to one consignee,
arriving at a port for orders; but if the master of any such vessel
requires a longer time to discharge her cargo, the wages or compensation
of the inspector, for every day's attendance exceeding the number of
days allowed by law, shall be paid by the master or owner; and thereupon
the collector is hereby authorized and required to allow such longer
time, not exceeding fifteen days. (R. S., 2881; June 3, 1892; sec. 2.)

All merchandise of which the collector shall take possession under the
provisions relating to the time for the discharge of a vessel's cargo
shall be kept with due and reasonable care at the charge and risk of the
owner. (R. S., 2969.)


Post entry.

If any package whatever which has been so reported is wanting, and not
found on board such vessel, or if the merchandise on board such vessel
does not otherwise agree with the report or manifest delivered by the
master of any such vessel, in every such case the master shall be liable
to a penalty of five hundred dollars; except that if it is made to
appear to the satisfaction of the collector, naval officer, and
surveyor, or to the major part of them where those officers are
established at any port, or to the satisfaction of the collector alone
where neither of the others is established, or in case of trial for the
penalty, to the satisfaction of the court, that no part whatever of
merchandise of such vessel has been unshipped, landed, or unladen since
it was taken on board, except as specified in the report or manifest,
and pursuant to permits, or that the disagreement is by accident or
mistake, in such case the penalty shall not be inflicted. But in all
such cases the master of any vessel shall be required and shall make a
post entry or addition to the report or manifest by him delivered of any
and all merchandise omitted to be included and reported in such
manifest; and it shall not be lawful to grant a permit to unlade any
such merchandise so omitted before such post entry or addition to such
report or manifest has been made. (R. S., 2887.)


Returns of unlading of cargo.

When the delivery of merchandise from on board of any vessel is
completed, copies of the accounts or entries which have been kept or
made thereof, by the officer charged with the deliveries, shall be
returned to the collector of the district, and the naval officer, if
any, within three days after such delivery has been completed, if at the
port where such officer resides, and if at any other port as soon as the
nature of the case will admit, not exceeding fifteen days. The accounts
or entries to be so returned shall comprise all deliveries made pursuant
to permits, and all packages or merchandise sent to the public stores;
also each and every package remaining on board of such vessel for the
purpose of being exported therein to a foreign port, or to some other
district of the United States. (R. S., 2888.)

Such returns shall be signed by the inspectors respectively under whose
superintendence the deliveries have been made; and, after examination,
and on being found correct, shall be countersigned or certified by the
surveyor of the port, if any, at the port where the deliveries have been
made. The returns shall be transmitted by him to the naval officer, if
any; who shall compare the same with the manifests and entries in his
possession; and if any difference appears, the particulars thereof shall
be noted by indorsement on the returns; and if no difference appears, it
shall be so noted by like indorsements. The naval officer shall transmit
the returns to the collector of the district; and on being returned to
the collector, shall be by him compared with the manifests and entries
of the merchandise, which have been made by the owner, consignee, or his
factor or agent; and if any difference appears, the same shall be noted
by indorsement on such manifests, specifying the particulars thereof;
and if no difference appears, it shall be noted by like indorsement,
that the delivery corresponds with the entry or entries thereof. The
indorsement or memorandum shall, in each case, be subscribed by the
officer by whom the comparison was made. (R. S., 2889.)


Vessels in distress.

If any vessel from any foreign port, compelled by distress of weather,
or other necessity, shall put into any port of the United States, not
being destined for the same, the master, together with the mate or
person next in command, may, within twenty-four hours after her arrival,
make protest in the usual form upon oath, before a notary public or
other person duly authorized, or before the collector of the district
where the vessel arrives, setting forth the cause or circumstances of
such distress or necessity. Such protest, if not made before the
collector, shall be produced to him, and to the naval officer, if any,
and a copy thereof lodged with him or them. The master shall also,
within forty-eight hours after such arrival, make report in writing to
the collector, of the vessel and her cargo, as is directed hereby to be
done in other cases. And if it appear to the collector, by the
certificate of the wardens of the port, or other officers usually
charged with, and accustomed to ascertain the condition of vessels
arriving in distress, if any, or by the certificate of two reputable
merchants, to be named for that purpose by the collector, if there are
no such wardens, or other officers duly qualified, that there is a
necessity for unlading the vessel, the collector and naval officer, if
any, shall grant a permit for that purpose, and shall appoint an
inspector to oversee such unlading, who shall keep an account of the
same, to be compared with the report made by the master of the vessel.
(R. S., 2891.)

All merchandise so unladen from any vessel arriving in distress shall be
stored under the direction of the collector, who, upon request of the
master of such vessel, or of the owner thereof, shall, together with the
naval officer, where there is one, and alone where there is none, grant
permission to dispose of such part of the cargo as may be of a
perishable nature, if any there be, or as may be necessary to defray the
expenses attending such vessel and her cargo. But entry shall be made
therefor, and the duties paid. (R. S., 2892.)

In case the delivery of the cargo does not agree with the report
thereof, made by the master of such vessel so arriving in distress, and
if the difference or disagreement is not satisfactorily accounted for in
manner prescribed by this Title [R. S., 2517-3129], the master of such
vessel shall be liable to such penalties as in other like cases are
prescribed. (R. S., 2893.)

The merchandise, or the remainder thereof, which shall not be disposed
of, may be reladen on board the vessel so arriving in distress, under
the inspection of the officer who superintended the landing thereof, or
other proper person; and the vessel may proceed with the same to the
place of her destination, free from any other charge than for the
storing and safe-keeping of the merchandise, and fees to the officers of
the customs as in other cases. (R. S., 2894.)


Obstruction by ice.

When a vessel is prevented by ice from getting to the port or place at
which her cargo is intended to be delivered, the collector of the
district in which such vessel may be obstructed may receive the report
and entry of such vessel, and, with the consent of the naval officer,
where there is one, grant permits for unlading or landing the
merchandise imported in such vessel, at any place within his district,
most convenient and proper. The report and entry of such vessel, and her
cargo, or any part thereof, and all persons concerned therein, shall be
subject to the same regulations and penalties as if the vessel had
arrived at the port of her destination, and had there proceeded to the
delivery of her cargo. (R. S., 2896.)


Salvage of merchandise.

All merchandise imported into the United States shall, for the purpose
of this title [R. S., 2517-3129] be deemed and held to be the property
of the person to whom the merchandise may be consigned; but the holder
of any bill of lading consigned to order and endorsed by the consignor
shall be deemed the consignee thereof.

And in case of the abandonment of any merchandise to the underwriters,
the latter may be recognized as the consignee, and under such
regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, merchandise
saved from a vessel wrecked or abandoned at sea, or on or along the
coasts of the United States and promptly brought into a port of the
United States by or in possession of the salvors of the same, can, for
the purpose of its title, be regarded as the property of such salvors,
and the valuation thereof and payment of duties thereon can be made
accordingly and with due reference to the condition of said merchandise
as thus saved and the necessities of the case:

_Provided, however_, That such bringing in by salvors shall be in good
faith and without intent to evade the just payment of duty:

_And provided further_, That nothing herein contained shall be so
construed as to prejudice in any other respect the rights of property,
or of or through abandonment or allowance of the owner or any other
person interested in said merchandise. (R. S., 3058; Feb. 23, 1887.)


Fraudulent importation of merchandise.

If any person shall fraudulently or knowingly import or bring into the
United States, or assist in so doing any merchandise, contrary to law,
or shall receive, conceal, buy, sell, or in any manner facilitate the
transportation, concealment, or sale of such merchandise after
importation, knowing the same to have been imported contrary to law,
such merchandise shall be forfeited and the offender shall be fined in
any sum not exceeding five thousand dollars nor less than fifty dollars,
or be imprisoned for any time not exceeding two years, or both.
Whenever, on trial for a violation of this section, the defendant is
shown to have or to have had possession of such goods, such possession
shall be deemed evidence sufficient to authorize conviction, unless the
defendant shall explain the possession to the satisfaction of the jury.
(R. S., 3082.)


Bribery and solicitation of bribes.

Any person who shall give, or offer to give or promise to give any money
or thing of value, directly or indirectly, to any officer or employee of
the United States in consideration of or for any act or omission
contrary to law in connection with or pertaining to the importation,
appraisement, entry, examination, or inspection of goods, wares, or
merchandise, including herein any baggage, or of the liquidation of the
entry thereof, or shall by threats or demands, or promises of any
character attempt to improperly influence or control any such officer or
employee of the United States as to the performance of his official
duties shall, on conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding two thousand
dollars, or be imprisoned at hard labor not more than one year, or both,
in the discretion of the court; and evidence of such giving, or
offering, or promising to give, satisfactory to the court in which such
trial is had, shall be regarded as prima facie evidence that such giving
or offering or promising was contrary to law, and shall put upon the
accused the burden of proving that such act was innocent, and not done
with an unlawful intention. (June 10, 1890; sec. 26; Oct. 3, 1913, sec.
III, AA.)

Any officer or employee of the United States who shall, excepting for
lawful duties or fees, solicit, demand, exact or receive from any
person, directly or indirectly, any money or thing of value, in
connection with or pertaining to the importation, appraisement, entry,
examination, or inspection of goods, wares, or merchandise, including
herein any baggage, or liquidation of the entry thereof, on conviction
thereof, shall be fined not exceeding five thousand dollars, or be
imprisoned at hard labor not more than two years, or both, in the
discretion of the court. And evidence of such soliciting, demanding,
exacting, or receiving, satisfactory to the court in which such trial is
had, shall be regarded as prima facie evidence that such soliciting,
demanding, exacting, or receiving was contrary to law, and shall put
upon the accused the burden of proving that such act was innocent and
not with an unlawful intention. (June 10, 1890; sec. 27; Oct. 3, 1913;
sec. III, BB.)


Liens for freight or general average.

Whenever the collector of the port of entry of the vessel, or other
proper officer of the customs, shall be duly notified in writing of the
existence of a lien for freight, charges, or contribution in general
average upon imported goods, wares, or merchandise in his custody, he
shall, before delivering such goods, wares, or merchandise to the
importer, owner, or consignee thereof for consumption, or to any vessel
or vehicle for transportation or exportation, give seasonable notice to
the party or parties claiming the lien; and the possession by the
officers of customs shall not affect the discharge of such lien, under
such regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe; and
such officer shall refuse the delivery of such merchandise from any
public or bonded warehouse or other place in which the same shall be
deposited until proof to his satisfaction shall be produced that the
freight, charges, or contribution in general average thereon has been
paid or secured; but the rights of the United States shall not be
prejudiced thereby, nor shall the United States or its officers be in
any manner liable for losses consequent upon such refusal to deliver. If
merchandise so subject to a lien, regarding which notice has been filed,
shall be forfeited to the United States and sold, the freight, charges,
or contribution in general average due thereon shall be paid from the
proceeds of such sale in the same manner as other charges and expenses
authorized by law to be paid therefrom are paid. (R. S., 2981; May 21,
1896.)




CHAPTER V

LIABILITY OF OWNERS, MASTERS, AND SHIPPERS


Liability of Owners, Masters and Shippers.

If any shipper of platina, gold, gold dust, silver, bullion, or other
precious metals, coins, jewelry, bills of any bank or public body,
diamonds, or other precious stones, or any gold or silver in a
manufactured or unmanufactured state, watches, clocks, or time pieces of
any description, trinkets, orders, notes, or securities for payment of
money, stamps, maps, writings, title-deeds, printings, engravings,
pictures, gold or silver plate or plated articles, glass, china, silks
in a manufactured or unmanufactured state, and whether wrought up or not
wrought up with any other material, furs, or lace, or any of them,
contained in any parcel, or package, or trunk, shall lade the same as
freight or baggage, on any vessel, without at the time of such lading
giving to the master, clerk, agent, or owner of such vessel receiving
the same a written notice of the true character and value thereof, and
having the same entered on the bill of lading therefor, the master and
owner of such vessel shall not be liable as carriers thereof in any form
or manner; nor shall any such master or owner be liable for any such
goods beyond the value and according to the character thereof so
notified and entered. (R. S., 4281.)

No owner of any vessel shall be liable to answer for or make good to any
person any loss or damage which may happen to any merchandise
whatsoever, which shall be shipped, taken in, or put on board any such
vessel, by reason or by means of any fire happening to or on board the
vessel, unless such fire is caused by the design or neglect of such
owner. (R. S., 4282.)

The liability of the owner of any vessel, for any embezzlement, loss, or
destruction, by any person, of any property, goods, or merchandise,
shipped or put on board of such vessel, or for any loss, damage, or
injury by collision, or for any act, matter, or thing, lost, damage, or
forfeiture, done, occasioned, or incurred, without the privity or
knowledge of such owner or owners, shall in no case exceed the amount or
value of the interest of such owner in such vessel, and her freight then
pending. (R. S., 4283.)

Whenever any such embezzlement, loss, or destruction is suffered by
several freighters or owners of goods, wares, merchandise, or any
property whatever, on the same voyage, and the whole value of the
vessel, and her freight for the voyage, is not sufficient to make
compensation to each of them, they shall receive compensation from the
owner of the vessel, in proportion to their respective losses; and for
that purpose the freighters and owners of the property, and the owner of
the vessel, or any of them, may take the appropriate proceedings in any
court, for the purpose of apportioning the sum for which the owner of
the vessel may be liable among the parties entitled thereto. (R. S.,
4284.)

It shall be deemed a sufficient compliance on the part of such owner
with the requirements of this Title [R. S., 4131-4305] relating to his
liability for any embezzlement, loss, or destruction of any property,
goods, or merchandise, if he shall transfer his interest in such vessel
and freight, for the benefit of such claimants, to a trustee, to be
appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction, to act as such trustee
for the person who may prove to be legally entitled thereto; from and
after which transfer all claims and proceedings against the owner shall
cease. (R. S., 4285.)

The charterer of any vessel, in case he shall man, victual, and navigate
such vessel at his own expense, or by his own procurement, shall be
deemed the owner of such vessel within the meaning of the provisions of
this Title [R. S., 4131-4305] relating to the limitation of the
liability of the owners of vessels; and such vessel, when so chartered,
shall be liable in the same manner as if navigated by the owner thereof.
(R. S., 4286.)

Nothing in the five preceding sections shall be construed to take away
or affect the remedy to which any party may be entitled, against the
master, officers, or seamen, for or on account of any embezzlement,
injury, loss, or destruction of merchandise, or property, put on board
any vessel, or on account of any negligence, fraud, or other
malversation of such master, officers, or seamen, respectively, nor to
lessen or take away any responsibility to which any master or seaman of
any vessel may by law be liable, notwithstanding such master or seaman
may be an owner or part owner of the vessel. (R. S., 4287.)

Any person shipping oil of vitrol, unslaked lime, inflammable matches,
or gunpowder, in a vessel taking cargo for divers persons on freight,
without delivering, at the time of shipment, a note in writing,
expressing the nature and character of such merchandise, to the master,
mate, officer, or person in charge of the lading of the vessel, shall be
liable to the United States in a penalty of one thousand dollars. (R.
S., 4288; June, 19, 1886; sec. 4.)

The individual liability of a shipowner shall be limited to the
proportion of any or all debts and liabilities that his individual share
of the vessel bears to the whole; and the aggregate liabilities of all
the owners of a vessel on account of the same shall not exceed the value
of such vessel and freight pending: _Provided_, That this provision
shall not affect the liability of any owner incurred previous to the
passage of this act, nor prevent any claimant from joining all the
owners in one action; nor shall the same apply to wages due to persons
employed by said shipowners. (June 26, 1884; sec. 18.)

The provisions of the seven preceding sections, and of section eighteen
of an act entitled "An act to remove certain burdens on the American
merchant marine and encourage the American foreign carrying-trade, and
for other purposes," approved June twenty-sixth, eighteen hundred and
eighty-four, relating to the limitations of the liability of the owners
of vessels, shall apply to all seagoing vessels, and also to all vessels
used on lakes or rivers or in inland navigation, including canal-boats,
barges, and lighters. (R. S., 4289; June 19, 1886; sec. 4.)


Act of February 13, 1893 (Harter Act).

It shall not be lawful for the manager, agent, master or owner of any
vessel transporting merchandise or property from or between ports of the
United States and foreign ports to insert in any bill of lading or
shipping document any clause, covenant, or agreement whereby it, he, or
they shall be relieved from liability for loss or damage arising from
negligence, fault, or failure in proper loading, stowage, custody, care,
or proper delivery of any and all lawful merchandise or property
committed to its or their charge. Any and all words or clauses of such
import inserted in bills of lading or shipping receipts shall be null
and void and of no effect. (Sec. 1.)

It shall not be lawful for any vessel transporting merchandise or
property from or between ports of the United States of America and
foreign ports, her owner, master, agent or manager to insert in any bill
of lading or shipping document any covenant or agreement whereby the
obligations of the owner or owners of said vessel to exercise due
diligence, properly equip, man, provision, and outfit said vessel, and
to make said vessel seaworthy and capable of performing her intended
voyage, or whereby the obligations of the master, officers, agents, or
servants to carefully handle and stow her cargo and to care for and
properly deliver same, shall in any wise be lessened, weakened, or
avoided. (Sec. 2.)

If the owner of any vessel transporting merchandise or property to or
from any port in the United States of America shall exercise due
diligence to make the said vessel in all respects seaworthy and properly
manned, equipped, and supplied, neither the vessel, or owners, agent, or
charterers shall become or be held responsible for damage or loss
resulting from faults or errors in navigation or in the management of
said vessel, nor shall the vessel, her owner or owners, charterers,
agent, or master, be held liable for losses arising from dangers of the
sea or other navigable waters, acts of God, or public enemies, or the
inherent defect, quality, or vice of the thing carried, or from
insufficiency of package, or seizure under legal process, or for loss
resulting from any act or omission of the shipper or owner of the goods,
his agent or representative, or from saving or attempting to save life
or property at sea, or from any deviation in rendering such service.
(Sec. 3.)

It shall be the duty of the owner or owners, masters, or agent of any
vessel transporting merchandise or property from or between ports of the
United States and foreign ports to issue to shippers of any lawful
merchandise a bill of lading, or shipping document, stating, among other
things, the marks necessary for identification, number of packages, or
quantity, stating whether it be carrier's or shipper's weight, and
apparent order or condition of such merchandise or property delivered to
and received by the owner, master, or agent of the vessel for
transportation, and such document shall be prima facie evidence of the
receipt of the merchandise therein described. (Sec. 4.)

For a violation of any of the provisions of this act the agent, owner,
or master of the vessel guilty of such violation, and who refuses to
issue on demand the bill of lading herein provided for, shall be liable
to a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars. The amount of the fine and
costs for such violation shall be a lien upon the vessel, whose agent,
owner, or master is guilty of such violation, and such vessel may be
libeled therefor in any district court of the United States, within
whose jurisdiction the vessel may be found. One-half of such penalty
shall go to the party injured by such violation and the remainder to the
Government of the United States. (Sec. 5.)

This act shall not be held to modify or repeal sections forty-two
hundred and eighty-one, forty-two hundred and eighty-two, and forty-two
hundred and eighty-three of the Revised Statutes of the United States,
or any other statute defining the liability of vessels, their owners, or
representatives. (Sec. 6.)

Sections one and four of this act shall not apply to the transportation
of live animals. (Feb. 13, 1893; sec. 7.)


General libel bond.

When a warrant of arrest or other process in rem is issued in any cause
of admiralty jurisdiction, except in cases of seizures for forfeiture
under any law of the United States, the marshal shall stay the execution
of such process, or discharge the property arrested if the process has
been levied, on receiving from the claimant of the property a bond or
stipulation in double the amount claimed by the libelant, with
sufficient surety, to be approved by the judge of the court where the
cause is pending, or, in his absence, by the collector of the port,
conditioned to answer the decree of the court in such cause. Such bond
or stipulation shall be returned to the court, and judgment thereon,
against both the principal and sureties, may be recovered at the time of
rendering the decree in the original cause. And the owner of any vessel
may cause to be executed and delivered to the marshal a bond or
stipulation, with sufficient surety, to be approved by the judge of the
court in which he is marshal, conditioned to answer the decree of said
court in all or any cases that shall thereafter be brought in said court
against the said vessel, and thereupon the execution of all such process
against said vessel shall be stayed so long as the amount secured by
such bond or stipulation shall be at least double the aggregate amount
claimed by the libelants in such suits which shall be begun and pending
against said vessel; and like judgments and remedies may be had on said
bond or stipulation as if a special bond or stipulation had been filed
in each of said suits. The court may make such orders as may be
necessary to carry this section into effect, and especially for the
giving of proper notice of any such suit. Such bond or stipulation shall
be indorsed by the clerk with a minute of the suits wherein process is
so stayed, and further security may at any time be required by the
court. If a special bond or stipulation in the particular cause shall be
given under this section, the liability as to said cause on the general
bond or stipulation shall cease. (R. S., 941; Mar. 3, 1899.)




CHAPTER VI

MISCELLANEOUS LAWS


Rescuing shipwrecked American seamen.

Expenses which may be incurred in the acknowledgment of the services of
masters and crews of foreign vessels in rescuing American seamen or
citizens from shipwreck, four thousand five hundred dollars. (June 30,
1914.)


School ships.

The Secretary of the Navy, to promote nautical education, is hereby
authorized and empowered to furnish, upon the application in writing of
the governor of a State, a suitable vessel of the navy, with all her
apparel, charts, books, and instruments of navigation, provided the same
can be spared without detriment to the naval service, to be used for the
benefit of any nautical school, or school or college having a nautical
branch, established at each of the following ports of the United States:
Boston, Philadelphia, New York, Seattle, San Francisco, Baltimore,
Detroit, Saginaw, Michigan, Norfolk, and Corpus Christi, upon the
condition that there shall be maintained at such port a school or branch
of a school for the instruction of youths in navigation,
steamship-marine engineering, and all matters pertaining to the proper
construction, equipment, and sailing of vessels or any particular branch
thereof. (Sec. 1.)

A sum not exceeding the amount annually appropriated by any State or
municipality for the purpose of maintaining such a marine school or
schools or the nautical branch thereof is hereby authorized to be
appropriated for the purpose of aiding in the maintenance and support of
such school or schools: _Provided, however_, That appropriations shall
be made for one school in any port heretofore named in section one and
that the appropriation for any one year shall not exceed twenty-five
thousand dollars for any one school. (Sec. 2.)

The President of the United States is hereby authorized, when in his
opinion the same can be done without detriment to the public service, to
detail proper officers of the navy as superintendents of or instructors
in such schools: _Provided_, That if any such school shall be
discontinued, or the good of the naval service shall require, such
vessel shall be immediately restored to the Secretary of the Navy and
the officers so detailed recalled: _And provided further_, That no
person shall be sentenced to or received at such schools as a punishment
or commutation of punishment for crime. (June 20, 1874; Mar. 3, 1881;
Mar. 4, 1911; sec. 3.)


Navy ration.

The navy rations shall consist of the following daily allowance of
provisions to each person: One pound and a quarter of salt or smoked
meat, with three ounces of dried or six ounces of canned or preserved
fruit, and three gills of beans or peas, or twelve ounces of flour; or
one pound of preserved meat, with three ounces of dried or six ounces of
canned or preserved fruit and eight ounces of rice or twelve ounces of
canned vegetables, or six ounces of desiccated vegetables; together with
one pound of biscuit, two ounces of butter, four ounces of sugar, two
ounces of coffee or cocoa, or one-half ounce of tea and one ounce of
condensed milk or evaporated cream; and a weekly allowance of
one-quarter pound of macaroni, four ounces of cheese, four ounces of
tomatoes, one-half pint of vinegar or sauce, one-quarter pint of
pickles, one-quarter pint of molasses, four ounces of salt, one-half
ounce of pepper, one-eighth ounce of spices, and one-half ounce of dry
mustard. Seven pounds of lard, or a suitable substitute, shall be
allowed for every hundred pounds of flour issued as bread, and such
quantities of yeast and flavoring extracts as may be necessary. (R. S.,
1580; July 1, 1902; June 29, 1906.)

The following substitution for the components of the ration may be made
when deemed necessary by the senior officer present in command: "For one
and one-quarter pounds of salt or smoked meat or one pound of preserved
meat, one and three-quarter pounds of fresh meat or fresh fish, or eight
eggs; in lieu of the articles usually issued with salt, smoked or
preserved meat, one and three-quarter pounds of fresh vegetables; for
one pound of biscuit, one and one-quarter pounds of soft bread or
eighteen ounces of flour; for three gills of beans and peas, twelve
ounces of flour or eight ounces of rice or other starch food, or twelve
ounces of canned vegetables; for one pound of condensed milk or
evaporated cream, one quart of fresh milk; for three ounces of dried or
six ounces of canned or preserved fruit, nine ounces of fresh fruit; and
for twelve ounces of flour or eight ounces of rice or other starch food,
or twelve ounces of canned vegetables, three gills of beans or peas; in
lieu of the weekly allowance of one-quarter pound of macaroni, four
ounces of cheese, one-half pint of vinegar or sauce, one-quarter pint of
pickles, one-quarter pint of molasses, and one-eighth ounce of spices,
three pounds of sugar, or one and a half pounds of condensed milk, or
one pound of coffee, or one and a half pounds of canned fruit, or four
pounds of fresh vegetables, or four pounds of flour.

"An extra allowance of one ounce of coffee or cocoa, two ounces of
sugar, four ounces of hard bread or its equivalent, and four ounces of
preserved meat or its equivalent shall be allowed to enlisted men of the
engineer and dynamo force who stand night watches between eight o'clock
postmeridian and eight o'clock antemeridian, under steam." (R. S., 1581;
July 1, 1902; June 29, 1906.)


Export of arms to American countries.

Whenever the President shall find that in any American country
conditions of domestic violence exist which are promoted by the use of
arms or munitions of war procured from the United States, and shall make
proclamation thereof, it shall be unlawful to export except under such
limitations and exceptions as the President shall prescribe any arms or
munitions of war from any place in the United States to such country
until otherwise ordered by the President or by Congress.

Any shipment of material hereby declared unlawful after such a
proclamation shall be punishable by fine not exceeding ten thousand
dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both. (Apr. 22,
1898; Mar. 14, 1912; sec. 2.)


Mines, torpedoes, and harbor defenses.

Whoever shall willfully trespass upon, injure, or destroy any of the
works or property or material of any submarine mine or torpedo, or
fortification or harbor-defense system owned or constructed or in
process of construction by the United States, or shall willfully
interfere with the operation or use of any such submarine mine, torpedo,
fortification, or harbor-defense system, shall be fined not more than
five thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
[See also act Mar. 4, 1909, sec. 272, p. 468.] (Mar. 4, 1909; sec. 44;
Repeals act July 7, 1898.)


Sale of arms and liquors to Pacific islanders.

Whoever, being subject to the authority of the United States, shall
give, sell, or otherwise supply any arms, ammunition, explosive
substance, intoxicating liquor, or opium to any aboriginal native of any
of the Pacific islands lying within the twentieth parallel of north
latitude and the fortieth parallel of south latitude, and the one
hundred and twentieth meridian of longitude west and one hundred and
twentieth meridian of longitude east of Greenwich, not being in the
possession or under the protection of any civilized power, shall be
fined not more than fifty dollars, or imprisoned not more than three
months, or both. In addition to such punishment, all articles of a
similar nature to those in respect to which an offense has been
committed, found in the possession of the offender, may be declared
forfeited. If it shall appear to the court that such opium, wine, or
spirits have been given bona fide for medical purposes, it shall be
lawful for the court to dismiss the charge. (Mar. 4, 1909; sec. 308;
Repeals act Feb. 14, 1902, secs. 1-2.)

All offenses against the provisions of the section last preceding,
committed on any of said islands or on the waters, rocks, or keys
adjacent thereto, shall be deemed committed on the high seas on board a
merchant ship or vessel belonging to the United States, and the courts
of the United States shall have jurisdiction accordingly. (Mar. 4, 1909;
sec. 309; Repeals act Feb. 14, 1902, sec. 3.)


Exemption of private property at sea.

It is the sense of the Congress of the United States that it is
desirable, in the interest of uniformity of action by the maritime
states of the world in time of war, that the President endeavor to bring
about an understanding among the principal maritime powers with a view
of incorporating into the permanent law of civilized nations the
principle of the exemption of all private property at sea, not
contraband of war, from capture or destruction by belligerents. (J.
Res., Apr. 28, 1904.)


Assistance and salvage at sea.

The right to remuneration for assistance or salvage services shall not
be affected by common ownership of the vessels rendering and receiving
such assistance or salvage services. (Sec. 1.)

The master or person in charge of a vessel shall, so far as he can do so
without serious danger to his own vessel, crew, or passengers, render
assistance to every person who is found at sea in danger of being lost;
and if he fails to do so, he shall, upon conviction, be liable to a
penalty of not exceeding one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years, or both. (Sec. 2.)

Salvors of human life, who have taken part in the services rendered on
the occasion of the accident giving rise to salvage, are entitled to a
fair share of the remuneration awarded to the salvors of the vessel, her
cargo, and accessories. (Sec. 3.)

A suit for the recovery of remuneration for rendering assistance or
salvage services shall not be maintainable if brought later than two
years from the date when such assistance or salvage was rendered, unless
the court in which the suit is brought shall be satisfied that during
such period there had not been any reasonable opportunity of arresting
the assisted or salved vessel within the jurisdiction of the court or
within the territorial waters of the country in which the libelant
resides or has his principal place of business. (Sec. 4.)

Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to ships of war or to
Government ships appropriated exclusively to a public service. (Aug. 1,
1912; sec. 5.)


Protection against fire.

Every steamer carrying passengers or freight shall be provided with
suitable pipes and valves attached to the boiler to convey steam into
the hold and to the different compartments thereof to extinguish fire,
or such other suitable apparatus as may be prescribed by the regulations
of the board of supervising inspectors, with the approval of the
Secretary of Commerce, for extinguishing fire in the hold and
compartments thereof by the introduction through pipes into such hold
and compartments of carbonic acid gas or other fire-extinguishing gas or
vapor; and every stove used on board of any such vessel shall be well
and securely fastened, so as to prevent it from being moved or
overthrown, and all woodwork or other ignitible substances about the
boilers, chimneys, cook houses, and stove-pipes, exposed to ignition
shall be thoroughly shielded by some incombustible material in such a
manner as to leave the air to circulate freely between such material and
woodwork or other ignitible substance; and before granting a certificate
of inspection the inspector shall require all other necessary provisions
to be made throughout such vessels to guard against loss or danger from
fire. (R. S., 4470; Mar. 3, 1905; sec. 7.)

Every steamer permitted by her certificate of inspection to carry as
many as fifty passengers, or upward, and every steamer carrying
passengers, which also carries cotton, hay, or hemp, shall be provided
with a good double-acting steam fire-pump, or other equivalent apparatus
for throwing water. Such pump or other apparatus for throwing water
shall be kept at all times and at all seasons of the year in good order
and ready for immediate use, having at least two pipes of suitable
dimensions, one on each side of the vessel, to convey the water to the
upper decks, to which pipes there shall be attached, by means of
stop-cocks or valves, both between decks and on the upper deck, good and
suitable hose of sufficient strength to stand a pressure of not less
than one hundred pounds to the square inch, long enough to reach to all
parts of the vessel and properly provided with nozzles, and kept in good
order and ready for immediate service. Every steamer exceeding two
hundred tons burden and carrying passengers shall be provided with two
good double-acting fire-pumps, to be worked by hand; each chamber of
such pumps, except pumps upon steamers in service on the twenty-eighth
day of February, eighteen hundred and seventy-one, shall be of
sufficient capacity to contain not less than one hundred cubic inches of
water; and such pumps shall be placed in the most suitable parts of the
vessel for efficient service, having suitable well-fitted hose to each
pump, of at least one-half the vessel in length, kept at all times in
perfect order, and shipped up and ready for immediate use. On every
steamer not exceeding two hundred tons, one of such pumps may be
dispensed with. Each fire-pump thus prescribed shall be supplied with
water by means of a suitable pipe connected therewith, and passing
through the side of the vessel so low as to be at all times under water
when she is afloat. Every steamer shall also be provided with a pump
which shall be of sufficient strength and suitably arranged to test the
boilers thereof. (R. S., 4471; June 30, 1906.)

Every steamer carrying passengers during the night-time shall keep a
suitable number of watchmen in the cabins, and on each deck, to guard
against fire or other dangers, and to give alarm in case of accident or
disaster. (R. S., 4477.)

For any neglect to keep the watchmen required by the preceding section,
the license of the officer in charge of the vessel for the time being
shall be revoked; and every owner of such vessel who neglects or refuses
to furnish the number of men necessary to keep watch as required, shall
be fined one thousand dollars. (R. S., 4478.)

The board of supervising inspectors may require steamers carrying either
passengers or freight to be provided with such number and kind of good
and efficient portable fire-extinguishers as, in the judgment of the
board, may be necessary to protect them from fire when such steamers are
moored or lying at a wharf without steam to work the pumps. (R. S.,
4479.)

Every such steam vessel carrying passengers shall keep such fire
buckets, axes, and water barrels as shall be prescribed by the
regulations established by the board of supervising inspectors, with the
approval of the Secretary of Commerce. The buckets and barrels shall be
kept in convenient places and filled with water, to be in readiness in
case of fire, and the axes shall be kept in good order and ready for
immediate use. Tanks of suitable dimensions and arrangement, or buckets
in sufficient number, may be substituted for barrels. (R. S., 4483; Mar.
3, 1905; sec. 3.)


Inflammable or explosive cargo.

Upon the application of any master or owner of any steam vessel employed
in the carriage of passengers, for a license to carry gunpowder, the
local inspectors shall examine such vessel, and if they find that she is
provided with a chest or safe composed of metal, or entirely lined and
sheathed therewith, or if the vessel has one or more compartments
thoroughly lined and sheathed with metal, at a secure distance from any
fire, they may grant a certificate to that effect, authorizing such
vessel to carry as freight within such chest, safes, or compartments,
the article of gunpowder, which certificate shall be kept conspicuously
posted on board such vessel. (R. S., 4422; Mar. 4, 1915; Sec. 2.)

No loose hay, loose cotton, or loose hemp, camphene, nitro-glycerine,
naphtha, benzine, benzole, coal oil, crude or refined petroleum, or
other like explosive burning fluids, or like dangerous articles, shall
be carried as freight or used as stores on any steamer carrying
passengers; nor shall baled cotton or hemp be carried on such steamers
unless the bales are compactly pressed and thoroughly covered and
secured in such manner as shall be prescribed by the regulations
established by the board of supervising inspectors with the approval of
the Secretary of Commerce; nor shall gunpowder be carried on any such
vessel except under special license; nor shall oil of vitrol, nitric or
other chemical acids be carried on such steamers except on the decks or
guards thereof or in such other safe part of the vessel as shall be
prescribed by the inspectors. Refined petroleum, which will not ignite
at a temperature less than one hundred and ten degrees of Fahrenheit
thermometer, may be carried on board such steamers upon routes where
there is no other practicable mode of transporting it, and under such
regulations as shall be prescribed by the board of supervising
inspectors with the approval of the Secretary of Commerce; and oil or
spirits of turpentine may be carried on such steamers when put up in
good metallic vessels or casks or barrels well and securely bound with
iron and stowed in a secure part of the vessel; and friction matches may
be carried on such steamers when securely packed in strong, tight chests
or boxes, the covers of which shall be well secured by locks, screws, or
other reliable fastenings, and stowed in a safe part of the vessel at a
secure distance from any fire or heat. All such other provisions shall
be made on every steamer carrying passengers or freight, to guard
against and extinguish fire, as shall be prescribed by the board of
supervising inspectors and approved by the Secretary of Commerce.
Nothing in the foregoing or following sections of this Act shall
prohibit the transportation by steam vessels of gasoline or any of the
products of petroleum when carried by motor vehicles (commonly known as
automobiles) using the same as a source of motive power: _Provided,
however_, That all fire, if any, in such vehicles or automobiles be
extinguished immediately after entering the said vessel, and that the
same be not relighted until immediately before said vehicle shall leave
the vessel: _Provided further_, That any owner, master, agent, or other
person having charge of passenger steam vessels shall have the right to
refuse to transport automobile vehicles the tanks of which contain
gasoline, naphtha, or other dangerous burning fluids. (Mar. 3, 1905;
sec. 8.)

_Provided, however_, That nothing in the provisions of this Title shall
prohibit the transportation by vessels not carrying passengers for hire,
of gasoline or any of the products of petroleum for use as a source of
motive power for the motor boats or launches of such vessels. (May 28,
1906.)

_Provided further_, That nothing in the foregoing or following sections
of this Act shall prohibit the use, by steam vessels carrying passengers
for hire, of lifeboats equipped with gasoline motors, and tanks
containing gasoline for the operation of said motor-driven lifeboats:
_Provided, however_, That no gasoline shall be carried other than that
in the tanks of the lifeboats: _Provided further_, That the use of such
lifeboats equipped with gasoline motors shall be under such regulations
as shall be prescribed by the board of supervising inspectors with the
approval of the Secretary of Commerce. (Jan. 24, 1913.)

_Provided, however_, That nothing in the foregoing or following sections
of this Act shall prohibit the transportation and use by vessels
carrying passengers or freight for hire of gasoline or any of the
products of petroleum for the operation of engines to supply an
auxiliary lighting and wireless system independent of the vessel's main
power plant: _Provided further_, That the transportation or use of such
gasoline or any of the products of petroleum shall be under such
regulations as shall be prescribed by the Board of Supervising
Inspectors, with the approval of the Secretary of Commerce. (R. S.,
4472; Oct. 22, 1914.)

Every bale of cotton or hemp that shall be shipped or carried on any
passenger-steamer, without conforming to the provisions of the preceding
section, shall be subject to a penalty of five dollars, and shall be
liable to seizure and sale to secure the payment of such penalty. (R.
S., 4473.)

The Secretary of Commerce may grant permission to the owner of any steam
vessel, to use any invention or process for the utilization of petroleum
or other mineral oils or substances in the production of motive-power,
and may make and enforce regulations concerning the application and use
of the same for such purpose. But no such permission shall be granted,
unless upon the certificate of the supervising inspector of steamboats
for the district wherein such vessel is registered, and other
satisfactory proof that the use of the same is safe and efficient; and
upon such proof, and the approval of such certificate by the Secretary
of Commerce, a special license for the use of such process or invention
shall issue under the seal of the Department of Commerce. (R. S., 4474;
Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)

The Secretary of Commerce may permit the use of petroleum as fuel on
steamers not carrying passengers, without the certificate of the
supervising inspector of the district where the vessel is to be used,
subject to such conditions and safeguards as the Secretary of Commerce
in his judgment shall provide. For a violation of any of the conditions
imposed by the Secretary of Commerce a penalty of five hundred dollars
shall be imposed, which penalty shall be a lien upon the vessel, but a
bond may, as provided in other cases, be given to secure the
satisfaction of the judgment. (Oct. 18, 1888; Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)

_Provided further_, That when crude petroleum of a flash point not less
than one hundred and fifty degrees Fahrenheit, is carried in the
double-bottom fuel tanks of steamers using the same for fuel, the crude
petroleum carried in such tanks in excess of the necessities of the
voyage may be discharged at terminal ports when no passengers are on
board the ship. Crude petroleum carried and discharged under these
conditions will not be considered stores or cargo within the
contemplation of section forty-four hundred and seventy-two, Revised
Statutes of the United States. (R. S., 4474.)

All gunpowder, nitro-glycerine, camphene, naphtha, benzine, benzole,
coal-oil, crude or refined petroleum, oil of vitriol, nitric or other
chemical acids, oil or spirits of turpentine, friction-matches, and all
other articles of like character, when packed or put up for shipment,
shall be securely packed and put up separately from each other and from
all other articles; and the package, box, cask, or other vessel
containing the same shall be distinctly marked on the outside, with the
name or description of the article contained therein.

It shall be unlawful to transport, carry, or convey, liquid
nitro-glycerine, fulminate in bulk in dry condition, or other like
explosive, between a place in a foreign country and a place within or
subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, or between a place in
one State, Territory, or District of the United States, or place
noncontiguous to but subject to the jurisdiction thereof, and a place in
any other State, Territory, or District of the United States, or place
noncontiguous to but subject to the jurisdiction thereof, on any vessel
or vehicle of any description operated by a common carrier in the
transportation of passengers or articles of commerce by land or water.
(R. S., 4475.)

Every person who packs or puts up, or causes to be packed or put up for
shipment, any gunpowder, nitro-glycerine, camphene, naphtha, benzine,
benzole, coal oil, crude or refined petroleum, oil of vitriol, nitric or
other chemical acids, oil or spirits of turpentine, friction-matches, or
other articles of like character otherwise than as directed by the
preceding section, or who knowingly ships or attempts to ship the same,
or delivers the same to any such vessels as stores unless duly packed
and marked, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished by a
fine not exceeding two thousand dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding
eighteen months, or both; one-half of the fine to go to the informer,
and the articles to be liable to seizure and forfeiture. (R. S., 4476.)

Every package containing explosives or other dangerous articles when
presented to a common carrier for shipment shall have plainly marked on
the outside thereof the contents thereof; and it shall be unlawful for
any person to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to any common carrier
engaged in interstate or foreign commerce by land or water, for
interstate or foreign transportation, or to carry upon any vessel or
vehicle engaged in interstate or foreign transportation, any explosive,
or other dangerous article, under any false or deceptive marking,
description, invoice, shipping order, or other declaration, or without
informing the agent of such carrier of the true character thereof, at or
before the time such delivery or carriage is made. Whoever shall
knowingly violate, or cause to be violated, any provision of this
section, or of the three sections last preceding, or any regulation made
by the Interstate Commerce Commission in pursuance thereof, shall be
fined not more than two thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more than
eighteen months, or both. (Mar. 4, 1909; sec. 235; Repeals R. S., 5353,
5354.)

When the death or bodily injury of any person is caused by the explosion
of any article named in the four sections last preceding, while the same
is being placed upon any vessel or vehicle to be transported in
violation thereof, or while the same is being so transported, or while
the same is being removed from such vessel or vehicle, the person
knowingly placing, or aiding or permitting the placing, of such articles
upon any such vessel or vehicle, to be so transported, shall be
imprisoned not more than ten years. (Sec. 236.)

It shall be unlawful to transport, carry, or convey, any dynamite,
gunpowder, or other explosive, between a place in a foreign country and
a place within or subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, or
between a place in any State, Territory, or District of the United
States, or place noncontiguous to but subject to the jurisdiction
thereof, and a place in any other State, Territory, or District of the
United States, or place noncontiguous to but subject to the jurisdiction
thereof, on any vessel or vehicle of any description operated by a
common carrier, which vessel or vehicle is carrying passengers for hire:
_Provided_, That it shall be lawful to transport on any such vessel or
vehicle small arms ammunition in any quantity, and such fuses,
torpedoes, rockets, or other signal devices, as may be essential to
promote safety in operation, and properly packed and marked samples of
explosives for laboratory examination, not exceeding a net weight of
one-half pound each, and not exceeding twenty samples at one time in a
single vessel or vehicle; but such samples shall not be carried in that
part of a vessel or vehicle which is intended for the transportation of
passengers for hire: _Provided further_, That nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent the transportation of military or naval
forces with their accompanying munitions of war on passenger equipment
vessels or vehicles. (Mar. 4, 1909; Repeals R S., 5353 and 5354; sec.
232.)

The Interstate Commerce Commission shall formulate regulations for the
safe transportation of explosives, which shall be binding upon all
common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce which
transport explosives by land. Said commission, of its own motion, or
upon application made by any interested party, may make changes or
modifications in such regulations, made desirable by new information or
altered conditions. Such regulations shall be in accord with the best
known practicable means for securing safety in transit, covering the
packing, marking, loading, handling while in transit, and the
precautions necessary to determine whether the material when offered is
in proper condition to transport. Such regulations, as well as all
changes or modifications thereof, shall take effect ninety days after
their formulation and publication by said commission and shall be in
effect until reversed, set aside, or modified. (Sec. 233; Repeals R. S.,
5355.)

It shall not be lawful to transport, carry, or convey, ship, deliver on
board, or cause to be delivered on board, the substance or article known
or designated as nitro-glycerine, or glynoin oil, nitroleum or blasting
oil, or nitrated oil, or powder mixed with any such oil, or fiber
saturated with any such article, or substance, upon or in any vessel or
vehicle used or employed in transporting passengers by land or water
between a place in any foreign country and a place within the limits of
any State, Territory, or district of the United States, or between a
place in one State, Territory, or district of the United States, and a
place in any other State, Territory, or district thereof. (R. S., 4278.)

It shall not be lawful to ship, send, or forward any quantity of the
substances or articles named in the preceding section, or to transport,
convey, or carry the same by a vessel or vehicle of any description,
upon land or water, between a place in a foreign country and a place
within the United States, or between a place in one State, Territory, or
district of the United States, and a place in any other State Territory,
or district thereof, unless the same shall be securely enclosed,
deposited, or packed in a metallic vessel surrounded by plaster of
Paris, or other material that will be non-explosive when saturated with
such oil or substance, and separate from all other substances, and the
outside of the package containing the same be marked, printed, or
labeled in a conspicuous manner with the words "Nitro-glycerine,
dangerous." (R. S., 4279.)

The two preceding sections shall not be so construed as to prevent any
State, Territory, district, city, or town within the United States from
regulating or from prohibiting the traffic in or transportation of those
substances, between persons or places lying or being within their
respective territorial limits, or from prohibiting the introduction
thereof into such limits, for sale, use, or consumption therein. (R. S.,
4280.)




CHAPTER VII

THE CHIEF MATE


The Chief Officer of an ocean steamer is officially styled the Chief
Mate. Also, he is often referred to simply as the Mate. In passenger
liners, transports, and the like, the term Chief Officer, finds favor.
But among men of the sea, the fine old sailor title "Chief Mate"
prevails.

The Chief Mate has the most difficult, and in many ways, the most
important position on a vessel. An energetic Chief Mate, who is also
competent, makes his vessel a successful organization. He should possess
the necessary knowledge and skill in his profession, combined with
initiative, tact, and executive ability of a high order.

The position of Chief Mate is the test job of the sea. An indifferent
junior officer can survive for years, but when he is appointed Chief
Mate, he must either make good, and achieve promotion, or his faults and
shortcomings overtake him and ruin his career. This is the hard screen
through which the master mariners are sifted.

+Next to Master.+ The Chief Mate is next in authority to the Master, and
acts in his place during his absence. If the Master dies while the
vessel is at sea, the Chief Mate assumes command, and is vested with all
of the authority and responsibilities of that station, subject to the
pleasure of the owners upon the arrival of the vessel in port.

+He Reports for Duty.+ Upon receiving his appointment to a vessel as
Chief Mate, it is the duty of that officer to report on board and
present his credentials to the Master without delay. He should be ready
to take up his duties at once, settling all of his private affairs
before going on board.

He should carry out any special orders that the Master may give.

+Vessel in the Stream.+ If the vessel is in the stream the new Chief
Mate should note the following:

 1. Locate vessel on chart.

 2. Verify depth of water and character of bottom.

 3. How much chain out—what anchor? Is chain locked on windlass, or on
    riding chocks?

 4. If moored, either bow or stern, inspect mooring wires; trappings;
    etc., see to means for slipping and hauling in.

 5. Is the anchorage safe—at all times—at that season?

 6. What weather—tide—current—sea, may be expected?

 7. Examine windlass carefully—be certain you know how to work same +at
    night+.

 8. Look to compressors—capstans—and anchor davits, if fitted.

 9. Look to hand gear—that brake beams, bars, and stoppers are handy,
    and where located.

 10. Look for fo'c'sle hose, and connection. Be ready to flush off a
     chain covered with mud, so there will be no delay when heaving in.

 11. Look for docking telegraph—learn dial.

 12. Have Deck Engineer and Carpenter inspect the windlass with you, get
     all the wrinkles you can about same.

 13. Look for vessels near at hand. Is vessel clear of them when tide
     turns?

 14. Is vessel loading or discharging?

 15. Are lighters expected—which side—what cargo?

 16. Are cork fenders and skids ready?

 17. Are heaving lines handy?

 18. Are lines ready for the lighters?

 19. Look after gangway and side ladders.

 20. Are cargo clusters in order—where kept?

 21. Are riding lights in order?

 22. Has anchor watch been set?

 23. Is a working and life boat swung out and ready for lowering without
     delay?

 24. If blowing, have drift lead over side, tend same, and watch
     bearings.

+Vessel Alongside.+ If the vessel is alongside the new Chief Mate should
note the following:

 1. Look after mooring lines.

 2. Are they adjusted to the rise and fall of tide?

 3. Are they free from chafe?

 4. Are they properly disposed—springs, breasts, bow and stern
    lines—this is an art. Can one watchman tend them?

 5. Do they all bear an equal stress—this is important with wire hawsers.

 6. If near wooden warehouses—see if a wire fire warp has been led.

 7. Are the gangways safe?

 8. If bow or stern projects beyond bulkhead line, are lights ready?

 9. If twin-screw vessel, are propeller signs in place?

 10. Is a gangway watch necessary—is it being kept?

 11. Is the vessel discharging or loading—what—what holds—how near
     completed?

 12. What is the draft—forward and aft?

 13. How much water under her at low tide?

 14. Is the berth fair or foul?

 15. Telephone connection on dock. Number of Police, Fire, U. S. Secret
     Service.

 16. Locate water plugs on docks.

 17. Are rat guards on lines? Are they needed?

+In General.+ 1. Ask for cargo diagrams—how kept—if loading.

 2. Are the working holds under supervision—by whom?

 3. When will vessel be discharged—or ready to leave?

 4. Get reports from the junior officers—the boatswain and carpenter.

 5. Will she work at night?

 6. Are cargo clusters ready—length of cables—location of
    connections—are they in good order—where kept?

 7. Are the fire lines clear and in working order?

 8. When was last fire drill held—inspect log?

 9. Inspect crew list—muster same.

 10. Inspect station bill.

 11. Inspect crew's quarters. Look for signs of intoxicating
     liquors—destroy any found.

 12. Are bills of lading in order?

 13. Look after cargo gear—stays—masts—booms—guys—pendants—falls—whips—
     gins—skids—cargo slings—cargo falls—cargo hooks—nets, winches—etc.

 14. Are hatch covers, strong backs, battens, tarpaulins, wedges, etc.,
     ready and in good order?

 15. Pay special attention to the flanges on the steel strongbacks—are
     they true?

 16. Get acquainted with the engineers and establish friendly
     relations—this is important.

 17. Locate all sounding pipes—Have carpenter sound tanks and bilges and
     report.


THE WORK OF THE CHIEF MATE

Having reported for duty, and having seen to the matters outlined
above—and a smart Chief Mate sees such things quickly, for he must by
that time have spent more than a dog watch in the Merchant Service—the
new Chief Mate can intelligently carry on the work of his vessel.

+Different Vessels.+ Differences in construction, type, tonnage, and
trade, modify the size and kind of organization on board a steamer. But
in the main essentials, the work of the Chief Mate should be fairly
standard—he is charged with the supervision of everything that has to do
with the work of the deck department.

+Crew.+ The Chief Mate should study his junior officers and his crew. He
should at once check up the crew list; see that the living quarters on
board—including coal passers, firemen, and glory hole—are in a sanitary
and ship shape condition. He should see after everything having to do
with the sanitary condition of the vessel. Wash rooms, water closets,
showers, lockers, mess rooms, etc. All should be inspected daily.

+Station Bill.+ The Chief Mate should see that the Station Bill is
properly made out, and posted as required by law.

+Inventories.+ The materials and tools of the deck department come under
the immediate charge of the Chief Mate who should see that all
inventories are correctly kept, and that the stores list is properly
posted up from time to time. The correct list of unbroken ship's stores
is very important, and must be produced when the vessel enters the
customs.

The following lists should be kept and checked under the supervision of
the Chief Mate:

 A. Mooring lines, and hawsers—wire—manila—hemp.

 B. Tarpaulins—awnings—sails—dodgers—side screens—wind sails—ventilator
 covers—skylight covers—spare boat covers—mast covers, etc.,

 C. Boatswain's stores, rope, gear, tools, etc.

 D. Carpenter's stores, tools, lamps, oils, etc.

 E. Paints—oils—turpentine—white lead—red lead—bitumastic—bottom
    composition—putty, brushes, graining tools, etc., etc.

 F. Cargo gear—in use, condition, location, etc. Spare gear—condition
    and where stowed.

 G. Ship's navigating gear (under care of Second Mate).

 H. Coaling gear, condition, where stowed.

 I. Life-saving equipment—boats, rafts and their complete equipment.
    When bread boxes were last filled—inspected, when breakers were last
    filled, etc. Life preservers—number—location—last inspected. Fire
    hose, when supplied length, and location of reels, nozzles,
    couplings, reducers, valves, etc. Fire extinguishers,
    kind—number—location—when charged last. Axes, number—location.
    Buckets—number—location. Smoke helmets, condition and where stowed.
    Extra tarpaulins.

    Also ring buoys, rockets, line-throwing gun, spare lines,
    projectiles, powder charges—sewed in bunting bags, and stowed in
    proper canister. Coston lights, number—kind. Wave oil, tanks and
    fittings.

 J. Ship's signal gear—flags—rockets—etc. (under charge of Third Mate).


DUTIES IN PORT

Having familiarized himself with his vessel, her complement, equipment,
and stores, the Chief Mate is ready to take up his duties with full
knowledge of the situation.

The inspection of the vessel, from stem to stern, is a matter of some
time and, in a large steamer, calls for repeated investigation. Every
hole and tank and corner should be known to the Chief Mate, its
condition, its contents, and its use.

+Deck Crew.+ He must organize and supervise the routine work of the deck
department of the vessel.

 Third Mate—forward holds, under immediate eye of Chief Mate.

 Second Mate—after holds.

 Boatswain, in active charge of crew at work on deck, over the side, and
 in holds.

 Carpenter, at work about ship, under orders from the Chief Mate.

 Quartermasters—gangway, bridge, and hold watches, under junior officers.

In large steamers where extra watch officers, junior officers and
cadets, or sub-junior officers are carried, the Chief Mate usually has a
clerk, and his work is largely that of a general manager. In such
vessels the cargo, mail, baggage, specie, etc., is handled through the
purser, or other officer, and the Chief Mate devotes himself strictly to
the management of the seamanship end of his department.

+Holds.+ He must supervise the preparation of holds to receive cargo.

 Sweep clean.

 Dunnage on stringers.

 Limbers cleared—limber boards lifted.

 Bilges cleaned.

 Rose boxes cleared (strainers—strum boxes).

 Ceiling in good condition.

 Cargo battens in good condition.

 Smothering lines in good condition, ends clear.

 Sounding pipes not dented or bent out of shape, ends free.—Brass screw
 plugs in place.

 'Tween deck hatch covers, strong backs, etc., in good order.

 'Tween deck and hold electrical connections—in good order.

 Lift tank covers.

 Take-up tank manholes (engineers).

 Examine cement in tanks.

 See that stanchion brackets and shifting boards are ready for bulk
 cargoes, such as grain.

 See that sufficient dunnage is in each hold; spruce planking, and
 chocking pieces. Find out what kind of cargo is to be stowed.

 See all hold ladders in good order—rungs all secure.

 Look for runs of rust, under frames and stringers, in wake of mast
 doublings, under winch beds, under deck in wake of shrouds.

 Examine all ports and dead lights in 'tween decks.

 Examine all side ports—cargo—coal.

 All rust should be cleaned off and painted—red lead and pigment in
 linseed oil.

 See all bulkhead doors tight and in working order.

 Spare propeller blades, booms, anchors, hubs, etc., stowed below,
 should be examined as to lashings and rust. Spare shafting usually
 carried in shaft tunnel, under charge of Chief Engineer, if in hold,
 Chief Mates responsible for safety.

 Look to all wire lashings _in the nips_.

 Look for leaks in joints of shell plating abreast of hatches where
 drafts of cargo swing in against the side.

 Examine masts, at doublings, at the steps.

 Examine all fire lines and connections in holds and 'tween decks.

 Examine rivets under bed plates of winches.

 Examine framing under hatch coamings.

 Examine state of pillars and stanchions.

+Cargo Gear.+ The Chief Mate is charged with the proper use and upkeep
of the cargo handling gear. This includes everything except the steam
winches, and steam lines which are under the charge of the engineer
department.

The Chief Mate should supervise and attend to the following—note
condition and provide for proper maintenance:

 +Masts—and all fittings, viz.—collars—trucks—sheaves—links—shrouds—
 stays—and all equipment on masts, whether cargo, radio, lights, or
 lookout cages.+

 +King posts—same as masts—re-cargo handling.+

 +Booms—goosenecks—bands—links—shackles—sheaves—gins—guys—and cradles.+

 +Examine all shrouds and stays under the nips and thimbles.+

 +Examine all links—turnbuckles—bales—eye bolts—pins—cleats—etc., for
 excessive wear, or fracture.+

 +If wind platforms are fitted see to all stanchions, struts and
 brasses.+

 +When heavy purchases are to be rove, the Chief Mate should carefully
 supervise the preparation of the gear—preventers—lashings—etc.+

 +See that winches are powerful enough to take the load safely.+

 +See that booms are strong enough or are fished and reinforced where
 needed.+

 +Shore up weak goosenecks.+

 +Rig preventer guys—stays—etc.+

Leave nothing to chance—use new gear—know the weight to be lifted—be
sure it will clear the hatch coamings—the bulwarks—take your time. It
takes ten times as long to clear away a wreck as to make the most
careful preparation for lifting a heavy weight.

Learn the way to run the winches, their construction—lifting
capacity—steam pressure on lines—how to drain after working in cold
weather, locate pet cocks—know when they are properly lubricated. Know
as much as you can about steam and electrical deck machinery—(don't let
your curiosity stop here—find out all you can about the main engines and
boilers, it is interesting).

See that cargo falls come to the winch drums without chafing at the
heels of booms, or other places.

Winchmen and hatch tenders are often found working their hatches with
booms at the wrong angle—be ready to correct this. See that booms are
properly plumbed when lifting heavy strongbacks from the guides, or when
attempting to ship them. If in a roadstead, vessel feeling the swell,
have guys and bull-ropes rove to steady strongbacks or other heavy
weights lifted over the hatches.

Examine all pins of gin blocks, see that they are properly lubricated
with plumbago.

When beginning to work cargo, either in or out, see that all slings,
nets, falls, are in good order and that sufficient have been supplied.
Look after chain slings carefully in person, this saves accidents—look
at the hooks, see that jaws have not been opened, if so, discard.

Look after hatch boards and skids.

+Working Cargo.+ When the vessel is working cargo, whether with crew or
stevedores, the Chief Mate is in responsible charge. He is responsible
for the good condition of the gear, the proper stowage of the cargo, and
the lawful handling, stowage, and carriage of combustibles. He should
inform himself on this point.

+Whistle Signals.+ It is well, when working cargo, in cases where the
Chief Mate takes active direction of operations, such as taking in or
discharging extra heavy weights, to use a whistle signal when
communicating with the winch and hatch men. Excessive singing out and
undue noise of any kind indicates raw work and lack of real seamanship.

+Engages Stevedores.+ In many trades the Chief Mate engages the
Stevedores and keeps a record of their time.

+Care of Cargo.+ At the close of the working day the Chief Mate should
see that the hatches are properly covered, the tarpaulins laid smooth
and in proper number, and securely wedged, with battens, if necessary.

During the day, or at any time while the hatches are open while working
cargo, or otherwise, if rain is impending, the Chief Mate should use his
judgment about covering hatches in which perishable cargo is exposed. He
should also keep an eye on lighters alongside, and see that the
lightermen cover their cargoes in plenty of time.

Scuppers, outboard discharge pipes, as from the circulating pump, should
be considered when lighters carrying perishable cargo are alongside.

It is difficult often to establish the truth in regard to claims for
damaged cargo, and blame often attaches to the ship, with resulting loss
to the owners. This is often the case abroad—lightermen and consignees
are often of the same nationality—great care in safeguarding the
interests of the owners and the shippers is necessary.

+Duty to Cargo.+ The Chief Mate who establishes a record for the care of
cargo stamps himself as a man of reliable qualities—one who is bound to
gain the confidence of his superiors and owners.

Too much attention cannot be paid to this important part of the duty of
a sea officer in the Merchant Service. The duty to cargo is a trust that
should be impressed upon the minds of all members of the crew.

Many officers, in charge of cargo work, look upon this part of their
duty as a necessary nuisance—something to be bothered with as little as
possible. On the other hand, an alert officer can prevent damage, and
consequent loss to owners, amounting to more than his salary on every
voyage.

The Chief Mate should so regulate the hold duty, that the junior
officers can relieve each other, and get the maximum amount of liberty.
In ships so conducted, officers do not mind attending to business while
on duty. Where hold duty is conducted on the chain gang system—all work
and no leave—the owners suffer; so does the reputation of the Chief Mate.

+Pilfering of Cargo.+ In many trades pilfering from the cargo has become
a science. Wine casks are sprung out of true and the contents made away
with, hoops are knocked loose and holes are drilled. In ports where the
junk boat nuisance still prevails, vessels working cargo of all kinds
are the victims of wholesale thievery. This sort of thing can only be
stopped by vigilant supervision on the part of the officers of the
vessel. Only reliable men should be put in the holds as watchmen.
Offenders who are caught should be prosecuted—not merely discharged. The
broaching of cargo by the crew is a serious offense.

The loss must be made good, and the offender may be sentenced to a year
in jail.

+Accidents; Damage to Cargo.+ Accidents resulting in loss of cargo, or
damage to same due to the fault of the vessel's tackle, due to rain,
washing of the ship's decks, discharge through leaking scuppers, are
blamable to the Chief Mate and through him to the Master and owners of
the vessel.

+Stowage of Cargo.+ When stowing or discharging cargo the Chief Mate
should keep in mind the trim and stability of the vessel. When any
question as to her seaworthy condition arises, he should report the fact
to the Master without delay.

+Freeboard.+ The freeboard in American steamers is fixed by rules of the
underwriters. The load line should not be submerged (except in fresh
water, when the vessel is to go out in salt water. The Chief Mate should
know the rule governing loading for a salt water voyage in a fresh water
port).

+Cargo Diagrams.+ In taking aboard cargo to be delivered at a number of
different ports, the hold diagrams are very important. Such diagrams of
cargo stowage should be prepared by the officer in charge of the holds
and submitted to the Chief Mate for approval.

+Invoices; Bills of Lading.+ The Chief Mate receipts for all
consignments of cargo, when same is delivered on board in ports abroad,
or where no provision is made for handling such details by the freight
department of the company. In the tramp this duty is almost always
placed upon the Chief Mate. He is responsible for the accuracy of his
receipts, and that cargo signed for is in good condition and as
represented—marks—numbers—etc., before allowing same to be stowed.

Cargoes are usually accepted or rejected by the Mate on his own
responsibility.

 (A case in point where sugar, in bags, was brought alongside on a
 lighter, all nicely stacked. Best bags on top tier. This sugar had been
 wet with salt water—and was rejected on inspection by "tasting" the
 bags of the second tier.)

+Ventilation of Cargo.+ The Master is held responsible for the proper
ventilation of cargo. This responsibility is of course delegated to the
Chief Mate who personally is accountable to the Master for the careful
carrying out of this requirement.

+Kinds of Cargo.+ Cargoes are generally classified as "Measurement" and
"Dead Weight" cargoes. Most cargoes are "General" or mixed. Then of
course there are fluid cargoes, carried in bulk in tankers. The Chief
Mate who knows his business, will have mastered the various "kinks" that
go with the stowage and discharging of many kinds of cargo.

It is only possible here to indicate, in a brief fashion, the things the
Chief Mate should look after and know about.

+Coal Cargo.+ The Chief Mate should see that stowage is not commenced
until the hold has been properly prepared. See that steel masts are
carefully sealed, at the heel, that there is no "up take" for gases, in
the event of fire. See that every possible point of "up take" is stopped
off. See that shifting boards are firmly secured. That pillars and
stanchions are secure, if they have been replaced, and that the hold, if
length of passage warrants, is fitted with a gas pipe, plugged at bottom
end, for lowering a thermometer into the body of the cargo. Temperatures
should be taken at least every watch.

+Ventilation.+ Ventilation, +on the surface of the coal+, is very
necessary. Two ventilators, at least, for each hold; an intake and an
uptake (uptake to windward).

+Wet Coal.+ Wet coal is dangerous—it is specially subject to spontaneous
combustion.

+Trimming.+ In loading coal cargo, where nothing else is taken, the trim
of the vessel should be carefully watched by the Chief Mate, and the
trimmers directed in their work so that no subsequent trimming is
required after the cargo is all on board. Many kinds of coal sift down
and flow easily—this should be kept in mind.

+Ore Cargo.+ Vessels carrying ore are usually designed for that
particular trade. Where ore is to be carried in the usual type of
freighter, special care must be taken to fit the required trunks and
shifting boards. Heavy ore carried in the lower holds is liable to make
a vessel crank, and the Chief Mate should see that means are provided
for the lifting up of the weights, and the proper distribution, fore and
aft. The usual plan, in a vessel with four holds, is to fill No. 2 and
No. 3, and trim with No. 1 and No. 4. This keeps the cargo high
amidships, and eases the vessel in a seaway.

+Wooden Steamers.+ The shipment of ore cargoes in vessels of weak
construction, should not be attempted unless the movement of the ore
cannot be accomplished in any other way. The wooden steamers, built as
an emergency measure, are a case in point.

The highest skill in loading, stowage and handling will be required for
these vessels.

+Grain Cargo.+ The carriage of grain cargo calls for special precautions
to prevent shifting. The British Board of Trade and the underwriters
have made special rules for the stowage of such cargoes. The Chief Mate
should inform himself of these rules as a part of his stock of knowledge.

+Cotton Cargo.+ The danger to fire when loading a cotton cargo is great
and every precaution should be taken. Smoking, which should never be
permitted in the holds or about the hatches at any time, should be
specially guarded against when loading cotton.

Care should be taken that no sparks from the funnels, from passing or
nearby tugboats, or from steam boilers on the wharf, find their way into
the hatches. Have the fire lines connected up at all times and have the
steam on the smothering lines.

Steam is the best agent for smothering a cotton fire. If a fire starts
do not wet down the decks or side plating. This may get very hot, but do
not play cold water on it. Strains would be set up in the plating or
deck that might seriously injure it.

Keep all oil cans, oily waste, paint, paint pots or paint rags and
brushes away from the cotton.

Keep all ventilator cowls closed, to prevent sparks finding their way
into the cargo.

When hatches are closed down at night, or when battening down for sea,
the Chief Mate should have an officer make certain that no fire is
present in the holds.

All electrical conduits through the holds and 'tween decks should be
carefully inspected before loading a cotton cargo.

+Smoke Helmets.+ The smoke helmets should be handy and in order.

+Frozen Cargo.+ Vessels carrying frozen cargo are lined and insulated in
the holds prepared for this sort of stowage. All steel work should be
covered, on account of the high conductivity of the metal. The
insulating materials are usually granulated cork, charcoal, silicate
cotton, or sawdust. Felt and cow hair is also used. Dead air, if
properly confined, is an excellent insulating medium.

Care should be taken to avoid and detect fire in the insulating
material, due to spontaneous combustion.

The Chief Mate should be familiar with the system of refrigeration
used—cold-air—dry-air—ammonia—carbonic-anhydride—etc.

In some systems the air is chilled in the holds by piping, in others the
air is drawn from the holds to a chilling chamber and pumped back with
the required degree of cold.

+Chilled Beef.+ Chilled beef is usually shipped in quarters, and must be
suspended from the deck above by chains and hooks.

+Frozen Mutton.+ Mutton is usually shipped in carcases, frozen stiff and
stowed one on top of another. Being hollow, the interstices provide
space for the circulation of cold air. About 15 degrees Fahrenheit
should be maintained in the hold.

+General Cargo.+ Every general cargo is a rule unto itself. The Chief
Mate who knows his business will see to the proper stowage. This is the
cargo that demands care as to hold diagrams. The following points are
recommended for consideration:

 Keep perishable goods clear of the steel framing.

 Cargo liable to leakage should be stowed low.

 Cargo liable to damage from heat should be kept clear of engine-room
 bulkheads, steam lines, and not stowed close under upper deck when in
 hot weather trades.

 Casks, bung up and bilge free. Stow from amidships to wings and ends of
 hold. Use four beds for each cask.

 Casks, second tier—stow bilge and cutline.

 Barrels, hogsheads, etc. (63 gals.) eight heights.

 Puncheons (84 gals.) four heights.

 Pipes, butts, (126 gals.) three tiers.

 Always stow barrels, wet or dry, with head pieces vertical.

 Stow with marks up and out.

 Acids, on deck.

 Oilskins, on deck.

 Matches, on deck.

 Hay, on deck.

 Heavy, well-boxed cargo, low.

 Light crates, on top.

 Railroad iron, grating fashion.

 Dunnage, if needed, 10 inches on floors, 15 inches in bilges.

 Cargo ports, if fitted, blocked off with dunnage.

Care should be taken to stow liquors, canned goods, and things easily
broken open, in parts of the hold and 'tween decks where they can be
easily blocked off by less tempting cargo.

+Special Cargoes.+ Cargoes of chemicals, fruit, guano, jute, and the
like, will require special care and consideration. The deck officers of
a merchant vessel will do well if they keep and compare notes on matters
such as these. A vast amount of information having to do with the
important function of moving the products of the world is going begging
for the want of suitable recording. Such knowledge carries with it the
possibility for great saving. Merchant mariners, owners, and naval
designers take notice. The cargo note book is an important part of the
baggage of an officer.

+Munitions.+ Cargoes under the general heading of munitions call for the
most careful handling. It is well for the Chief Mate to know just what
is being stowed, and where. This knowledge should be of use in
exercising increased care in the management and handling of the vessel.
The Halifax disaster is a case in point.

+Cost Data.+ The Chief Mate who is on his job should keep cost data on
stevedoring, and in fact on most operations performed on board ship. He
should know how many men can work a hatch effectively, and what their
pay is, and how much cargo they can stow, say in tons (2,000 lbs.) per
working day:

 Cost data resolves itself into this.

 Amount of work done—any unit; tons of cargo—sq. ft. of paint.

 Number of men—and pay:

  Hatchmen at $.00 per hour.
  Holdmen at $.00 per hour.
  Lightermen or truckers at $.00 per hour.
  Checkers—tally men at $.00 per hour.

 Time required to do the work.

 Kind of cargo stowed.

 Port.

 Remarks—weather—sea—etc.

Cost data, actually kept, often is the foundation for important work
later on as superintendent and manager.

Keeping cost data is a good way to relieve the monotony of supervising
stevedores—it results in a note book of considerable value.

+Live Stock.+ Vessels carrying live stock present added problems for the
consideration of the Chief Mate. He should see to the proper
organization of the cattlemen, their attention to duty, etc. The Chief
Mate should be familiar with the laws relating to the carriage of live
stock on passenger vessels.

Horse slings should be provided for valuable animals. Other cattle taken
aboard in the stream are often slung on board by the horns alone.

Valuable horses should be placed in padded boxes, placed athwartships,
and same fitted with slings under the bellies of the animals.

+Passengers.+ Passengers are usually the special care of the Purser and
Steward. The Chief Mate, however, should so organize the work of the
ship that there is as little interference with the passengers as
possible. The Second Mate, is usually delegated as baggage officer and
has charge of the stowage and breaking out of this special cargo.

+Tank Steamers.+ Tank steamers, like everything else, are undergoing
changes in design, and each vessel requires special study on the part of
the officers.

The Chief Mate should be familiar with the system of piping and the
handling of the same. He should study the pipe diagrams and trace out
the lead and use of everything for his own information.

There are many things in tank steamers not common to the regular run of
sea carriers. The hose connections, the method of trimming, the use of
summer tanks, the expansion trunks, and the many wrinkles having to do
with the care and management of tankers.

When going into dry dock, be sure and see that all tanks are "gas free"
before lights or red hot rivets are introduced. This is done by steaming
them out, by blowing air through them, and by filling with water and
pumping same out, the oil in the water, which should be overflowing,
will run off first.

The officer who is going into tank steamers, or is in that service is
advised to get a small pamphlet by Mr. Herbert John White, a British
Merchant Marine officer, called OIL TANK STEAMERS, published by James
Brown and Son, Glasgow, and for sale in New York by D. Van Nostrand
Company (price $1.00). This is a very clear and practical manual for the
use of tank steamer officers—one of the best books of its kind.




CHAPTER VIII

THE CHIEF MATE (Continued)


+Receiving Stores.+ All stores delivered to the vessel should be
received by the officer of the deck. The Chief Mate should provide for
the proper receipt and the proper entries either in a log book or in a
stores receipt book. Everything should be checked, weighed, and
measured. This should be the basis for the approval of bills from supply
houses, etc.

+Keys.+ The key board of a vessel should be the direct charge of the
Chief Mate, delegated, if necessary, but he should see that the keys are
kept in order, properly marked, and only in the possession of those
entitled to have them in charge. Receipts should be given for all keys
drawn from the key board.

+Master Keys.+ The master keys should be in the possession of the Chief
Mate, and of the Master. When the Chief Mate goes ashore, the master
keys should be left with the officer in charge of the ship during his
absence.

The key board is a fair indication of the efficiency of a vessel.

+Harbor Regulations.+ All harbor regulations should be observed. It is
the duty of the Chief Mate to acquaint himself with these rules and see
that the vessel and the crew abide by them.

+Turning To.+ The time when men turn to and knock off, while in harbor,
should be regulated by the Chief Mate, subject to companies' rules,
customs, etc. It is well to abide strictly to these rules, but when the
safety of the vessel, or the necessities of work require it, extra work
may be demanded by the Chief Mate.

In the point of work in port, and at sea, for that matter, working
conditions are now bound up in agreements between companies and seamen's
unions. Much of this is necessary and was brought about by abuses
practiced upon seamen in days past.

The Chief Mate who gives his crew a right deal, and knows how to handle
and take care of his men, never has any trouble in getting work done
after hours. The answer is be human—also just and firm—no sailor has any
use for a jelly fish officer.

+Upkeep.+ The work in port is usually confined to washing down, cleaning
up after the stevedores, preparing holds for cargo, painting over the
side, painting the boot-topping when the vessel is light, and cleaning
up after coaling. At this time the steering gear and steering engine
should be looked after, cleaned up and overhauled.

Wooden decks should be washed down every morning, as at sea, especially
if in a warm port.

Cover the ends of mooring lines, to keep out dirt and grit; stow
superfluous lines below—but handy—this keeps them away from harm, +and
the junk boats+.

Unscrew and stow away all brass fittings—when in ports where these
things can be disposed of—in most ports where the vessel lies at an
unwatched wharf.

All persons leaving the vessel with packages, and suit cases—unless
officers or officials—should show contents to the gangway watch.

No one should be allowed on the bridge or bridge deck, unless there on
business.

+Fire Hoses, Axes, Buckets, Extinguishers, etc.+ The Chief Mate is
charged with the care and working order of the fire-fighting equipment
of the vessel.

Fire drills must be held as required by law.

+Life-saving Equipment.+ The Chief Mate must pay special attention to
the condition and readiness of the life boats, and their equipment:

 Life boats.
 Life rafts.
 Life belts.
 Ring buoys.
 Water lights.
 Storm-oil tanks.

He should see that the bread tins, after each inspection, are tightly
screwed down, or the contents may spoil, or be unfit at the next
inspection by the U. S. Steamboat Inspectors.

The list of required boat equipment is a long one and should be
carefully complied with.

The rockets and line-throwing gun should be kept in good order, lines
and projectiles handy; charges measured out and sewed in proper bags and
kept in a copper canister.

The boat-launching equipment must be kept in perfect working condition,
davits, strongbacks, gripes and falls. The required tubs must be
provided and the boat falls coiled in them, clear for running.

The Chief Mate must organize and carry out the required drills.

After all drills—see everything secured—hoses dried out, extinguishers
recharged—if used, axes, life belts, ring buoys, life preservers, etc.
stowed.

+Ground Tackle.+ The Chief Mate is charged with the good order and
upkeep of the ground tackle.

He should look after:

 Anchors.

 Chain.

 Riding chocks.

 Shackles.

 Pins.

 Forelocks.

 Markings (by turns of wire on studs), paint shackles white, as an aid
 in noting run of chain at night.

 Chain compressors.

 Stoppers.

Chain should be ranged when in dry dock, if time permits, and locker
cleaned out and painted. See that ends of the chains are lashed at the
_top_ of the chain locker.

The kedges and stream anchors should be where they can be got at. See
that the necessary gear for getting them out is ready and stowed handy
for use.

The windlass is in charge of the engineers. The Chief Mate should
understand its working, and the Carpenter should also understand it in
every detail.

See that the hand gear is in order and can be worked by the crew. It is
a good plan to try this out when opportunity offers. When the emergency
comes there is little time to drill.

+When Coming to Anchor, or Heaving In.+ The Chief Mate takes his station
on the f'c'sle head. He is in charge of the ground tackle.

Anchoring.

 Report when anchors are ready to let go.

 When anchor has been let go, report chain out as the shackles come
 through the hawse. When the anchor is down, report chain out. Trend of
 chain, etc.

Heaving in.

 Report "Short Stay."
 Report the shackles as they come to the water.
 Report "Anchor aweigh."
 Report "Anchor in sight"—"clear," or "foul anchor."
 Report anchor secured.
 Report both anchors ready for letting go.

A smart Chief Mate manages his work on the f'c'sle head without any
unnecessary singing out. In large ships the telegraph or whistle, or
hand signals are used between the Master on the bridge and the Chief
Mate.

The "trend" of the chain, when heaving in, should be indicated to the
bridge by direction of the hand. If heaving in in a tide way, this
information is important, and the engines are used to assist in breaking
out, while the vessel is given a proper sheer with the helm.

+Coming Alongside.+ As in coming to anchor, the Chief Mate's station is
on the forecastle head. He directs the handling of the vessel's forward
lines, the operation of the capstans, etc.

The Carpenter, Boatswain, and about half of the deck crew should be
assigned to this end of the vessel.

See all side ports closed or clear above string piece: Boats swung in if
necessary, etc.

The Chief Mate carries out lines, and handles the warps and springs as
directed by the Master, from the bridge. As little calling out of orders
as possible should be indulged in. Where both Mate and Master understand
their business, the coming alongside is a mere matter of detail and
works without a hitch. Where tugs are used, the Chief Mate should direct
the taking of lines, but the tugs receive their instructions direct from
the bridge.

Study of tide, wind, and local conditions, as well as knowledge of the
vessel herself, aid in smoothness in the performance of this evolution.

Have handy, heaving lines, cork fenders, and if necessary have a running
boat and crew ready to carry out the lines to the wharf. Send men on the
wharf rather than trust to help from casual loiterers.

+When Alongside.+ When alongside, see proper spring lines led so that
vessel can be shifted fore and aft as may be necessary in the working of
the cargo.

The proper mooring of the vessel is in charge of the Chief Mate. He
should satisfy himself that she is safe, that the lines are disposed in
the best possible way, free from chafe, and that the vessel will lie
without binding when at high water.

+Rat Guards.+ Where necessary, see that rat guards are placed on all
lines without delay.

In making fast, the Chief Mate should inform himself of the best
position of the ship for unloading or loading. The location of the
doors, if the wharf is covered, with respect to the hatches. The
location of chutes, water plugs, etc.

If lighters are to come in between the vessel and the wharf, means
should be at hand for breasting off, and for providing a gangway during
this operation.

The Chief Mate must plan ahead, think of what is needed, and provide for
it. He must keep such problems to himself and not bother the Master.

Overhang of the vessel's bow or stern at the off-shore end of a wharf or
pier should be considered; lights provided, fenders handy, and extra
breasts, and bow or stern lines led for safety.

+Coaling.+ The operation of coaling differs greatly in different ports
and in different vessels. The handling of the vessel and the rigging and
care of the coaling gear is a part of the duty of the deck department
and is under the supervision of the Chief Mate. In ports where gangways
are led to the wharf, or stages swung over side and the coal passed up
in baskets, or carried up by the shore gang, the problem is simple.

In ports like Coronel, Chile, where vessels lie in the stream and hoist
the coal up in canvas slings, considerable care should be given to the
gear and the leads to the deck winches.

Coaling ship is a partnership affair, and harmonious working between the
deck and engineers is essential.

Where the vessel lies under chutes, the trimming and supervision of same
is up to the black squad, and a great deal of trouble is saved if this
is done carefully. Where necessary see that spars or camels are ranged
alongside to give the vessel the required distance from the chutes—this
applies to small steamers with comparatively narrow beam.

Watch the mooring lines when coaling under the chutes—take in the slack
as necessary.

+Entering Dry Dock.+ When a vessel is about to enter a dry dock the
heads of the various departments should be notified in time, and should
be informed of the probable length of stay in the dock.

Also notify U. S. Local Inspectors that vessel will go in dock and
bottom can be examined.

All refuse should be put ashore, and provision made for taking care of
any that may accumulate while on the dock.

See that necessary lines, fenders, ladders, etc., are handy.

Prepare to do the work that is necessary on board ship, and best done
while the vessel is dry, viz.,

 Paint scuppers; hose reels.
 Range cables on floor of dock, overhaul same.
 Clean and paint or bitumastic the chain lockers.
 Have windlass overhauled.
 Paint funnels; cargo booms, king posts, etc.
 Paint and overhaul boats.

As the crew of a merchantman is not any too large, only work that can be
thoroughly done while in dock should be attempted.

+Blue Prints.+ The blue prints of the docking plan should be delivered
to the dock master. All assistance should be rendered to the dock
master, and his instructions carefully complied with.

If entering a graving dock, men will be needed to handle the wale shores.

If entering a floating dock the vessel will rest squarely upon her
bottom.

Straight stemmed vessels can best be placed on an absolutely level keel
by swinging a hand lead over the stem; the Chief Mate should see to this.

All closets, drains, and drip pipes should be shut off.

When the dock is dry the Chief Mate should make a careful inspection of
the bottom. If it is intended to drain the tanks; double bottoms, peaks,
etc., the carpenter should remove the necessary plugs. As soon as the
draining is completed these should be replaced and the Chief Mate should
see that they have been replaced properly by personal inspection. He
should see that the plugs are not wooden plugs—this has been done.

While the vessel is in dry dock, aside from any extraordinary repairs
that may be made, the following matters should be looked after:

 Bottom cleaned and examined.

 Note fouling and state of previous coatings, and when last applied.

 Note corrosion and damage.

 Outboard valves should be examined and reground when necessary.

 Rudder pintles and gudgeons should be carefully examined. Rudder
 lifted, and repairs made if necessary.

 Stuffing boxes and valves of the rudder should be repacked.

 Look for corrosion along the butts of shell plating. Look for corroded
 rivets; such rivets should be removed and new ones driven.

 Look after all zincs at the stern frames, valve openings, and at the
 propellers.

 Examine struts, propeller shafting, brackets, etc.

+Painting.+ It is essential that the bottom be dry before applying the
anti-fouling paints. It should also be clean and the paint should be
well stirred before being taken in the individual buckets of the
painters.

All metal but the zincs and the bronze propellers should be covered.

+Waterline.+ The waterline should be properly struck; nothing looks
worse—except perhaps a camouflaged tramp—than a vessel with a slovenly
line to her boot top.

The correct and neat painting of the draft numerals on stem and stern
should be seen to.

+Docking Notes.+ It is well for the Chief Mate to keep "docking notes,"
these will come in very handy later on.

Seeing a vessel out of water is vastly different from merely inspecting
her blue prints.

+If Vessel Has Grounded.+ If the vessel has grounded before going on the
dock, the greatest care should be taken in her inspection.

The bottom should be "sighted"; the cement on the tank bottoms and in
the bilges should be examined for cracks.

The dock master should be consulted before weights of any kind are
shifted while the vessel is on the blocks.

+Duties of Chief Mate at Sea.+ The duties of the Chief Mate, while the
vessel is at sea, depend upon the size and organization of the ship. If
a large vessel, he does not stand a bridge watch, but devotes his entire
time to the management of the deck department of the vessel. He is on
duty all the time, but turns in at night, much the same as the Master.

In most vessels the Chief Mate stands a watch, usually the four to
eight. This enables him to oversee things from the bridge, which he
should never leave, and it gives him some time after breakfast to look
over the vessel and outline the work of the boatswain.

The duties of the watch, the navigation, and lookout, are much the same
for all officers, and will be dealt with under the chapter on the
Officer of the Watch.

At sea the routine of keeping the vessel clean, of attending to the
upkeep of hull and gear, and of looking after the ventilation of the
cargo, is largely a matter of the particular trade in which she is
engaged.

A vessel jumping from port to port, with her booms up and down twice a
week, presents a different problem from the vessel that keeps at sea a
week or two at a time. The weather, the kind of cargo, the fact that
passengers are carried or not, all tend to modify and direct the
progress of work on board.

Before the Panama Canal was built, cargo vessels trading from the
Atlantic Coast to the West Coast and the Hawaiian Islands, carried out a
routine at sea as comfortable and settled as that of a sailing ship.
Weather and time were in their favor and the maximum amount of painting
and overhauling of gear could be attended to between ports.

So far as duty, aside from keeping watch is concerned, the Chief Mate
should look after the following:

 Have temperature of holds taken twice a day—coal cargo every watch.

 Arrange for inspection and ventilation as weather permits.

 Carry on all work with as little interference as possible, when
 passengers are on board.

 Take into consideration the weather, when about to start painting.
 Always clean all surfaces before applying paint.

 See a daily washdown of all wooden decks.

 Keep all canvas dodgers and screens scrupulously white.

 Under him the boatswain carries on the work as outlined.

 Boat drills, fire drill, etc., are carried out under his direction
 while at sea and duly entered in the log.

The Chief Mate should see that all necessary assistance is given to the
officer of the watch—when he stands days duty—in matters of taking
soundings, turning ventilators, setting and taking in awnings, heaving
the deep sea lead, etc. Where the Chief Mate stands his watch, the watch
officer on duty during a day watch is technically in full charge, and
gives his orders direct.

+Cooperation.+ The Chief Mate should manage his department so that he
will obtain the cooperation of the heads of all other departments in the
vessel, Chief Engineer, Purser, Doctor, Chief Steward, all should be in
harmony. A thorough understanding of the work and needs of these
officers helps toward the smooth working of a ship.

+Conclusion.+ From the foregoing, it will be seen that the Chief Mate
who attends to his duty in every detail is a very busy officer. It will
also be noted that he is not called upon to handle the hose while
washing down (I have seen this done), to juggle paint brushes, or sew a
seam.

The Chief Mate must first of all be a sailor—he must know how—his orders
can only be successfully enforced when backed up by the knowledge and
experience that tell him when things are going right or wrong.

The dignity and power of command come to the sea officer who is fully
competent and alive to the high responsibilities of his calling. Much of
his duty can be delegated—its responsibility, however, always rests with
him.

The Chief Mate who respects his billet, who respects the work and the
rights of those under him, and who makes them respect the ship and
himself, in turn, may well feel satisfied. He has something concrete,
something definite, and worth while; he has his vessel to be proud of,
and to reflect credit upon himself and his service. Such an officer is a
gentlemen in the finest sense of the word—with all of his duties, and
they are many—he will find time to cultivate ideals and expand his soul.

The prize of command will soon be his, and then he can look forward to
years of satisfying service as Master.




CHAPTER IX

RULES OF THE U. S. SUPERVISING INSPECTORS RELATING TO LIFESAVING


LIFE BOATS

The capacity of lifeboats shall hereafter be determined by an allowance
of 15 cubic feet for each person carried.


Equipment for lifeboats.

All lifeboats on ocean steam vessels shall be equipped as follows:

 A properly secured life line the entire length on each side, festooned
 in bights not longer than 3 feet, with a seine float in each bight.

 One painter of manila rope of not less than 2¾ inches in circumference
 and of suitable length.

 A full complement of oars and two spare oars.

 One set and a half of thole pins or rowlocks attached to the boat with
 separate chains.

 One steering oar with rowlock or becket and one rudder with tiller or
 yoke and yoke lines.

 One boat hook attached to a staff of suitable length.

 Two life preservers.

 Two hatchets.

 One galvanized-iron bucket with lanyard attached.

 One bailer.

 Where automatic plugs are not provided there shall be two plugs secured
 with chains for each drain hole.

 One efficient liquid compass with not less than a 2-inch card.

 One lantern containing sufficient oil to burn at least nine hours and
 ready for immediate use.

 One can containing one gallon of illuminating oil.

 One box of friction-matches wrapped in a waterproof package and carried
 in a box secured to the underside of the stern thwart.

 A wooden breaker or suitable tank fitted with a siphon, pump, or spigot
 for drawing water, and containing at least 1 quart of water for each
 person.

 Two enameled drinking cups.

 A water-tight receptacle containing 2 pounds avoirdupois of provisions
 for each person. These provisions may be hard bread or United States
 Army ration. The receptacle shall be of metal, fitted with an opening
 in the top not less than 5 inches in diameter, properly protected by a
 screw cap made of heavy cast brass, with machine thread and an attached
 double toggle, seating to a pliable rubber gasket, which shall insure a
 tight joint, in order to properly protect the contents of the can.

 One canvas bag containing sailmaker's palm and needles, sail twine,
 marline, and marline spike.

 A water-tight metal case containing 12 self-igniting red lights capable
 of burning at least two minutes.

 A sea anchor.

 A vessel containing 1 gallon of vegetable or animal oil, so constructed
 that the oil can be easily distributed on the water and so arranged
 that it can be attached to the sea anchor.

 In addition to the equipment already required in lifeboats, there shall
 be provided a hand pump with a plunger of not less than 2 inches in
 diameter, and a discharge pipe of sufficient length to reach clear of
 the boat's side.

Steam vessels carrying passengers and which enter the War Zone shall
have each and every lifeboat which is carried under davits equipped with
mast and sail and proper gear for same, as required by this section.


Food or provisions to be carried in lifeboats.

The food or provisions required to be carried in lifeboats may be hard
bread or the "United States Army Emergency Ration." Food which produces
unusual or immoderate thirst, such as corned beef, salt fish, etc., will
not be allowed, under any circumstances, as lifeboat provisions.

When hard bread only is carried in the lifeboat, there must be provided
in addition thereto at least ten United States Army emergency rations.


How lifeboats shall be carried.

Lifeboats on cargo steamers shall be provided with a separate set of
davits for each lifeboat required. When this requirement makes it
necessary to install additional davits, it is recommended that the
additional davits be of the mechanical type, to facilitate quick and
safe launching. The old type of davits with "turning out gear" is not
considered as mechanical davits.


Additional life-saving equipment.

Cargo vessels shall carry sufficient lifeboats to accommodate every
person on board, and in addition thereto shall carry a sufficient number
of approved life rafts to accommodate at least twenty-five per cent of
the total number of persons on board.


Precautionary measures.

Before entering the War Zone all the lifeboats and life rafts shall be
cleared away and made ready for launching, and the master or officer in
charge, shall assure himself that all the required equipment is in the
lifeboats and life rafts, in good order, and ready for immediate
service. Steamers which are not equipped with mechanical davits shall
have all the lifeboats swung out (weather permitting) and ready for
immediate launching before entering the War Zone.


Future construction.

Cargo vessels contracted for after May 1, 1917, and serving trades
within the War Zone, shall be equipped on each side with lifeboats of
sufficient capacity to accommodate all persons on board based upon an
allowance of 15 cubic feet per person, and in addition thereto shall be
equipped with a sufficient number of approved life rafts to accommodate
at least twenty-five per cent of all persons on board.


Handling of the boats and rafts.

All the boats and rafts must be stowed in such a way that they can be
launched in the shortest possible time and that, even under unfavorable
conditions of list and trim from the point of view of the handling of
the boats and rafts, it may be possible to embark in them as large a
number of persons as possible.

The arrangements must be such that it may be possible to launch on
either side of the vessel as large a number of boats and rafts as
possible.


Strength and operation of the davits

The davits shall be of such strength that the boats can be lowered with
their full complement of persons and equipment, the vessel being assumed
to have a list of 15 degrees.

The davits must be fitted with a gear of sufficient power to insure that
the boat can be turned out against the maximum list under which the
lowering of the boats is possible on the vessel in question.

The Secretary of Commerce is authorized by the seamen's act in specific
cases to exempt existing vessels from the requirements of this section
that the davits shall be of such strength and shall be fitted with a
gear of sufficient power to insure that the boats can be lowered with
their full complement of persons and equipment, the vessel being assumed
to have a list of 15 degrees, where their strict application would not
be practicable or reasonable.

Each set of davits shall have a boat of the first class attached to it,
provided that the number of open boats of the first class attached to
davits shall not be less than the minimum number fixed by law.

If it is neither practicable nor reasonable to place on a vessel the
minimum number of sets of davits required, a small number of sets of
davits may be fitted, provided always that this number shall never be
less than the minimum number of open boats of the first class required
by law.

If a large proportion of the persons on board are accommodated in boats
whose length is greater than 50 feet, a further reduction in the number
of sets of davits may be allowed exceptionally, if the arrangements are
in all respects satisfactory.

In all cases in which a reduction in the minimum number of sets of
davits or other equivalent appliances required by the rules is allowed,
the owner of the vessel in question shall be required to prove, by a
test made in the presence of an officer designated by the Supervising
Inspector General, that all the boats can be efficiently launched in a
minimum time.

The conditions of this test shall be as follows:

 _First._ The vessel is to be upright and in smooth water.

 _Second._ The time is the time required from the beginning of the
 removal of the boat covers, or any other operation necessary to prepare
 the boats for lowering, until the last boat or pontoon raft is afloat.

 _Third._ The number of men employed in the whole operation must
 not exceed the total number of boat hands that will be carried on the
 vessel under normal service conditions.

 _Fourth._ Each boat when being lowered must have on board at least
 two men and its full equipment as required by the rules.

 _Fifth._ The time allowed for this test shall not exceed 10
 minutes.


2 Lifeboats swung out—1 on each side.

All passenger steam vessels, except those fitted with mechanical davits,
shall, when the weather permits, have one of their lifeboats swung out
on each side while at sea, brailed into a boom or rail and ready for
immediate use.


Equivalents for and weight of the persons.

In test for determining the number of persons which a boat or pontoon
raft can accommodate each person shall be assumed to be an adult person
wearing a life preserver.

In verifications of freeboard the pontoon boats shall be loaded with a
weight of at least 165 pounds for each adult person that the pontoon
boat is authorized to carry.

In all cases two children under 12 years of age shall be reckoned as one
person.


Marking of lifeboats.

All lifeboats shall have the number of boat plainly marked or painted on
each bow, in figures not less than 3 inches high. Where lifeboats are
carried on both sides of a vessel, lifeboat No. 1 shall be forward on
starboard side of vessel, lifeboat No. 2 forward on port side, lifeboat
No. 3 next abaft lifeboat No. 1 on starboard side, lifeboat No. 4 next
abaft lifeboat No. 2 on port side, and so forth, the odd-numbered boats
being on the starboard side and the even-numbered boats being on the
port side of vessel. All lifeboats shall have their cubic contents and
the number of persons such lifeboat is allowed to carry plainly marked
or painted on each bow in letters and figures not less than
three-fourths of an inch high. All lifeboats shall also have the number
of persons allowed to be carried plainly marked or painted on top of at
least two of the thwarts, in letters and figures not less than 3 inches
high. When the letters and figures above required are painted on
lifeboats, such letters and figures shall be dark on a light ground or
light on a dark ground.


Lifeboats and life rafts kept clear for launching.

The decks on which lifeboats of any class or life rafts are carried
shall be kept clear of freight or any other obstruction that would
interfere with the immediate launching of the lifeboats or life rafts.
(R. S. Secs. 4405, 4488.)


Boat-davit falls and receptacles therefor.

It shall be the duty of the master or officer in charge of all vessels
to see that the boat-davit falls shall at all times be in readiness for
immediate use, and protected from ice, and not painted, and such
boat-davit falls on all boats not swung out at boat drills shall be cast
loose and overhauled; and it shall be unlawful to stow in any lifeboat
articles other than those required by law and regulations. On all
steamers over 1,000 gross tons, covered tubs, boxes, or reels shall be
provided in which to stow away the boat-davit falls.


Care of lifeboats.

Lifeboats shall be stripped, cleaned, thoroughly overhauled, and painted
at least once in every year.


Embarkation of the passengers in the lifeboats and rafts.

Suitable arrangements shall be made for embarking the passengers in the
boats, in accord with regulations by the Board of Supervising
Inspectors, with the approval of the Secretary of Commerce.

In vessels which carry rafts there shall be a number of rope or wooden
ladders always available for use in embarking the persons on to the
rafts.


Certificated lifeboat men—manning of the boats.

There shall be for each boat or raft a number of lifeboat men at least
equal to that specified as follows: If the boat or raft carries 25
persons or less, the minimum number of certificated lifeboat men shall
be 1; if the boat or raft carries 26 persons and less than 41 persons,
the minimum number of certificated lifeboat men shall be 2; if the boat
or raft carries 41 persons and less than 61 persons, the minimum number
of certificated lifeboat men shall be 3; if the boat or raft carries
from 61 to 85 persons, the minimum number of certificated lifeboat men
shall be 4; if the boat or raft carries from 86 to 100 persons, the
minimum number of certificated lifeboat men shall be 5; if the boat or
raft carries from 111 to 160 persons, the minimum number of certificated
lifeboat men shall be 6; if the boat or raft carries from 161 to 210
persons, the minimum number of certificated lifeboat men shall be 7;
and, thereafter, 1 additional certificated lifeboat man for each
additional 50 persons: _Provided_, That if the raft carries 15 persons
or less a licensed officer or able seaman need not be placed in charge
of such raft: _Provided further_, That one-half the number of rafts
carried shall have a capacity of exceeding 15 persons.

The allocation of the certificated lifeboat men to each boat and raft
remains within the discretion of the master, according to the
circumstances.

By "certificated lifeboat man" is meant any member of the crew who holds
a certificate of efficiency issued under the authority of the Secretary
of Commerce.

In order to obtain the special lifeboat man's certificate the applicant
must prove to the satisfaction of an officer designated by the Secretary
of Commerce that he has been trained in all the operations connected
with launching lifeboats and the use of oars; that he is acquainted with
the practical handling of the boats themselves; and, further, that he is
capable of understanding and answering the orders relative to lifeboat
service.


Manning of boats.

A licensed officer or able seaman shall be placed in charge of each boat
or pontoon raft; he shall have a list of its lifeboat men, and other
members of its crew which shall be sufficient for her safe management,
and shall see that the men placed under his orders are acquainted with
their several duties and stations.

A man capable of working the motor shall be assigned to each motor boat.

The duty of seeing that the boats, pontoon rafts, and other life-saving
appliances are at all times ready for use shall be assigned to one or
more officers.


LIFE RAFTS

Handling of the rafts.

All rafts must be stowed in such a way that they can be launched in the
shortest possible time and that, even under unfavorable conditions of
list and trim from the point of view of the handling of the rafts, it
may be possible to embark in them as large a number of persons as
possible.

The arrangements must be such that it may be possible to launch on
either side of the vessel as large a number of rafts as possible.
Marking rafts.

There shall be stenciled in a conspicuous place on each life raft now in
use the number of persons said raft can carry, as hereinafter provided.


Care of life rafts.

All life rafts shall be stripped, cleaned, painted, and thoroughly
overhauled at least once in every year.


Equipment for life rafts.

All life rafts on ocean steam vessels shall be equipped as follows:

 A properly secured life line entirely around the sides and ends of the
 raft, festooned to the gunwales in bights not longer than 3 feet with a
 seine float in each bight.

 One painter of manila rope of 2¾ inches in circumference, and of
 suitable length.

 Four oars.

 Five rowlocks properly attached.

 One boat hook attached to a staff of suitable length.

 One self-igniting life-buoy light.

 One sea anchor.

 A vessel containing 1 gallon of vegetable or animal oil, so constructed
 that the oil can be easily distributed on the water, and so arranged
 that it can be attached to the sea anchor.

 A water-tight receptacle containing 2 pounds avoirdupois of provisions
 for each person. These provisions may be hard bread or United States
 Army ration. The receptacle shall be of metal and fitted with an
 opening in the top not less than 5 inches in diameter, properly
 protected by a screw cap made of heavy cast brass, with machine thread
 and an attached double toggle, seating to a pliable rubber gasket,
 which shall insure a tight joint, in order to properly protect the
 contents of the can.

 A water-tight receptacle containing 1 quart of water for each person.

 Two enameled drinking cups.

 A water-tight metal case containing six self-igniting red lights
 capable of burning at least two minutes.

 A water-tight box of matches.

All loose equipment must be securely attached to the raft to which it
belongs.


Life preservers.

Every ocean vessel inspected under the provisions of Title LII, Revised
Statutes of the United States, shall be provided with one good life
preserver, having the approval of the Board of Supervising Inspectors,
for each and every person carried, and every ocean vessel carrying
passengers shall have in addition thereto a number of life preservers
suitable for children equal to at least 10 per cent of the total number
of persons carried.


Ring life buoys.

The number of ring life buoys with which steamers must be provided is as
follows: Vessels under 400 feet in length, 12, of which 6 must be
luminous; vessels of 400 feet in length and less than 600 feet, 18, of
which 9 must be luminous; vessels of 600 feet in length and less than
800 feet, 24, of which 12 must be luminous; vessels of 800 feet in
length and over, 30, of which 15 must be luminous.

Ring life buoys shall not be permanently secured in any way, but shall
be so placed as to be readily accessible in an emergency. Their location
shall be plainly indicated in the vessel's station bill.

One of the buoys on each side of the vessel shall have a life line
attached of at least 15 fathoms in length.

_Luminous buoys_ are those having attached an efficient self-igniting
light which can not be extinguished in water.

All the life buoys and life jackets shall be so placed as to be readily
accessible to the persons on board; their position shall be plainly
indicated so as to be known to the persons concerned.

The life buoys shall always be capable of being rapidly cast loose, and
shall not be permanently secured in any way. The owner of any vessel who
neglects or refuses to provide and equip his vessel with such lifeboats,
floats, rafts, life preservers, line-carrying projectiles, and the means
of propelling them, drags, pumps, or other appliances, as are required
under the provisions of this section, or under the regulations of the
Board of Supervising Inspectors, approved by the Secretary of Commerce,
authorized by and made pursuant hereto, shall be fined not less than
$500, nor more than $5,000, and every master of a vessel who shall fail
to comply with the requirements of this section, and the regulations of
the Board of Supervising Inspectors, approved by the Secretary of
Commerce, authorized by and made pursuant hereto, shall upon conviction
be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500.


Line-carrying guns, rockets and equipment.

All ocean steam, pleasure vessels and ocean steam vessels carrying
passengers, except vessels of 150 gross tons and under, shall be
provided with at least three line-carrying projectiles and the means of
propelling them, such as may have received the formal approval of the
Board of Supervising Inspectors.


Rockets.

When approved _rockets_ are used instead of guns, there shall be in
every case at least three of said rockets, and all steamers that are
required under the law to carry line-carrying projectiles and the means
of propelling them shall be supplied auxiliary thereto with at least 800
feet of 3-inch manila line for vessels of over 150 and not over 500
gross tons and 1,500 feet of said line for steamers above 500 gross
tons; and, except where approved rockets are provided, with three
approved service projectile lines and three projectiles. Such auxiliary
line and all other equipment shall be kept always ready for use in
connection with the gun and rocket, which lines and other equipment
shall not be used for any other purpose. (R. S., 4488.)


Requirements for firing tests.

The test rounds required shall be fired from the gun when mounted on its
own carriage, lashed as it would be in shipboard use.

The line shall be coiled, faked, or reeled in its own faking box or
reel, and the gun, carriage, line box or reel, and projectiles shall all
bear the same number and shall be initialed by the inspector, whose
report of the test, giving number, date, and result, shall be filed in
the office of the supervising inspector of the district in which the
test is made.


Service lines and projectiles.

Service projectile lines hereafter approved shall be similar in size to
that used by the United States Coast Guard, of not less than 1,700 feet
in length, and capable of withstanding a breaking strain of 500 pounds,
and the projectile end shall be so protected that line will not burn
when fired from the gun.

The projectiles required to be furnished with each gun shall weigh not
less than 18 pounds, smoothly turned and finished, with a windage of not
more than one sixty-fourth of an inch.


Drill required with line-carrying gun.

The master of every vessel equipped with a line-carrying gun shall drill
his crew in the use thereof and fire said gun at least once in every
three months, using one-half the usual charge of powder and any ordinary
line of proper length.

It shall be the duty of the inspectors, at the annual inspection, to see
that these drills are entered on the log of the vessels.


Placard containing instructions for use of gun and rocket apparatus.

A placard containing instructions for using the gun and rocket apparatus
required by the foregoing section and as practiced by the United States
Coast Guard shall be posted in the pilot house, engine room, and in the
seamen's, firemen's, and steward's department of every steam vessel
required by law to carry such gun or rocket apparatus. (R. S., 4405.)


Storm oil.

On and after January 1, 1915, ocean vessels of more than 200 gross tons
propelled by machinery and navigating the oceans or gulfs shall carry a
supply of oil for the purpose of smoothing the sea or quelling the force
of the waves in case of emergency or necessity in the following
quantities:

 Vessels of over 200 and not over 1,000 gross tons, 30 gallons.
 Vessels of over 1,000 and not over 3,000 gross tons, 40 gallons.
 Vessels of over 3,000 and not over 5,000 gross tons, 50 gallons.
 Vessels of over 5,000 gross tons shall carry at least 100 gallons.

This oil shall be accessible and available at all times, and the
location of the supply and the means and methods of its distribution
shall be determined by the master of the vessel.


Steamer's name on equipments.

All the equipments of a steamer, such as buckets, hose, axes, boats,
oars, rafts, life preservers, floats, barrels, and tanks, shall be
painted or branded with the name of the steamer upon which they are
used. (R. S., 4405.)


Muster roll and drills.

Special duties for the event of an emergency shall be allotted to each
member of the crew.

The muster list shows all these special duties, and indicates, in
particular, the station to which each man must go, and the duties that
he has to perform.

Before the vessel sails the muster list shall be drawn up and exhibited,
and the proper authority, to be designated by the Secretary of Commerce,
shall be satisfied that the muster list has been prepared for the
vessel. It shall be posted in several parts of the vessel, and in
particular in the crew's quarters.


Muster list.

The muster list shall assign duties to the different members of the crew
in connection with—

 (_a_) The closing of the water-tight doors, valves, and so forth.

 (_b_) The equipment of boats and rafts generally.

 (_c_) The launching of the boats attached to davits.

 (_d_) The general preparation of the other boats and the pontoon
       rafts.

 (_e_) The muster of the passengers.

 (_f_) The extinction of fire.

The muster list shall assign to the members of the stewards' department
their several duties in relation to the passengers at a time of
emergency. These duties shall include—

 (_a_) Warning the passengers.

 (_b_) Seeing that they are dressed and have put on their life
       jackets in a proper manner.

 (_c_) Assembling the passengers.

 (_d_) Keeping order in the passages and on the stairways, and,
       generally, controlling the movements of the passengers.

The muster list shall specify definite alarm signals for calling all the
crew to the boat and fire stations, and shall give full particulars of
these signals.


Musters and drills.

Musters of the crews at their boat and fire stations, followed by boat
and fire drills, respectively, shall be held at least once a week,
either in port or at sea. An entry shall be made in the official log
book of these drills, or of the reason why they could not be held.

Different groups of boats shall be used in turn at successive boat
drills. The drills and inspections shall be so arranged that the crew
thoroughly understand and are practiced in the duties they have to
perform, and that all the boats and pontoon rafts on the ship with the
gear appertaining to them are always ready for immediate use.


Stairways and deck room.

Every such steam-vessel carrying passengers on the main-deck shall be
provided with permanent stairways and other sufficient means, convenient
to the passengers, for their escape to their upper deck, in case of the
vessel sinking or of other accident endangering life; and in the stowage
of freight upon such deck, where passengers are carried, gangways or
passages, sufficiently large to allow persons to pass freely through
them, shall be left open both fore and aft of the vessel, and also to
and along the guards on each side. (R. S., 4484.)

The captain or mate of every such steam-vessel carrying passengers upon
the main-deck shall assign to all deck-passengers, when taking passage,
the space on deck they may occupy during the voyage, and such space
shall not thereafter be occupied by freight nor overcrowded by other
persons, nor shall freight be stowed about the boilers or machinery, in
such a manner as to obstruct or prevent the engineer from readily
attending to his duties. (R. S., 4485.)

For every violation of the provisions of the two preceding sections the
owners of the vessel shall be punished by a fine of three hundred
dollars. (R. S., 4486.)




CHAPTER X

PASSENGER ACT OF 1882


The laws governing the carriage of passengers, explosives, live stock,
etc., on vessels of the American Merchant Marine are as follows:

 Accommodations.
 Light and air.
 Provisions.
 Medical attendance.
 Discipline and cleanliness.
 Privacy of passengers.
 Explosives; cattle.
 Boarding vessel; passenger list.
 Death of passenger.
 Inspection.
 Penalties.


Accommodations.

It shall not be lawful for the master of any vessel whereon steerage
passengers have been taken at any port or place in a foreign country or
dominion (ports and places in foreign territory contiguous to the United
States excepted) to bring such vessel and passengers to or take from any
port or place in the United States unless the compartments, spaces, and
accommodations hereinafter mentioned have been provided, allotted,
maintained, and used for and by such passengers during the entire
voyage, unobstructed by cargo, stores, or goods. The master of a vessel
coming to a port or place in the United States in violation of any of
the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor;
and if the number of steerage passengers carried or brought in the
vessel, or in any compartment, space, poop, or deck house thereof, is
greater than the number allowed to be carried or brought therein,
respectively, as hereinafter prescribed, the said master shall be fined
fifty dollars for each and every such passenger in excess of the proper
number, and may also be imprisoned not exceeding six months.

_First._ In computing the number of passengers carried or brought in any
vessel, children under one year of age shall not be included, and two
children between one and eight years of age shall be counted as one
passenger; and any person brought in such vessel who shall have been,
during the voyage, taken from any other vessel wrecked or in distress on
the high seas, or have been picked up at sea from any boat, raft, or
otherwise, shall not be included in such computation.

_Second._ The expression "steerage passenger" means all passengers
except cabin passengers, and persons shall not be deemed cabin
passengers unless the space allotted to their exclusive use is in the
proportion of at least thirty-six clear superficial feet to each
passenger.

_Third._ The expression "lowest passenger deck" means the deck next
below the water line; and the expression "passenger deck" includes every
deck or portion of a deck which is above the lowest passenger deck, and
is appropriated for passengers.

_Fourth._ A vessel shall not carry passengers, whether cabin or steerage
passengers, on more than one deck below the water line.

_Fifth._ The height between that part of any deck on which steerage
passengers are carried and the deck immediately above it shall not be
less than six feet.

_Sixth._ No steerage passengers shall be carried on the lowest passenger
deck unless it is efficiently lighted by side scuttles and otherwise to
the satisfaction of the inspector.

_Seventh._ No greater number of steerage passengers shall be carried on
the lowest passenger deck than in the proportion of one steerage
passenger to every twenty-one clear superficial feet allotted to their
use. If, however, the height between the lowest passenger deck and the
deck immediately above it is less than seven feet, and the apertures,
exclusive of side scuttles, through which light and air are admitted are
less in size than in the proportion of three square feet to every one
hundred superficial feet of that deck, no greater number of steerage
passengers shall be carried on that deck than in the proportion of one
steerage passenger to every thirty clear superficial feet thereof,
subject to the allowance for measurement of public rooms, lavatories,
and bath rooms, if any, provided for by paragraph ten.

_Eighth._ No greater number of steerage passengers may be carried on a
passenger deck than in the proportion of one steerage passenger to every
eighteen clear superficial feet of deck allotted to their use, subject
to the allowance for measurement of public rooms, lavatories, and bath
rooms, if any, provided for by paragraph ten. If, however, the height
between any passenger deck and the deck immediately above it be less
than seven feet, no greater number of steerage passengers may be carried
on that deck than in the proportion of one steerage passenger to every
twenty-one clear superficial feet thereof, subject to the allowance for
measurement of public rooms, lavatories, and bath rooms, if any,
provided for by paragraph ten.

_Ninth._ A vessel, whatever be the superficial space of the passenger
decks and of the lowest passenger deck, shall not carry a greater number
of steerage passengers on the whole than in the proportion of one
steerage passenger to every five superficial feet of air or promenade
space provided on a deck so open as not to be included in the tonnage
and approved by the inspector, and this space shall not be counted or
included in the area available for any other passengers, or in other
areas for steerage passengers prescribed by this section.

_Tenth._ In the measurement of the passenger decks and of the lowest
passenger deck, the space occupied by that part of the personal baggage
of the steerage passengers which the inspector permits to be carried
there shall be included, and also on whatever deck located, commodious
and suitable dining rooms, lounging rooms, smoking rooms, lavatories,
toilet rooms, and bath rooms: _Provided_, That—

 (_a_) The space in any place appropriated to the use of steerage
 passengers in which they sleep shall not be less than eighteen
 superficial feet in the case of the lowest passenger deck and fifteen
 superficial feet in the case of a passenger deck.

 (_b_) Each space so included in the measurement must be clearly marked
 to the satisfaction of the inspector as being exclusively appropriated
 for the use of the steerage passengers.

_Eleventh._ Each separate compartment in which steerage passengers are
berthed shall be conspicuously marked, showing the total area of such
compartments. (Aug. 2,1882; Dec. 19, 1908.)

In every such steamship or other vessel there shall be a sufficient
number of berths for the proper accommodation as hereinafter provided,
of all such passengers. There shall not be on any deck nor in any
compartment or space occupied by such passengers more than two tiers of
berths. The berths shall be properly constructed, and be separated from
each other by partitions, as berths ordinarily are separated, and each
berth shall be at least two feet in width and six feet in length; and
the interval between the floor or lowest part of the lower tier of
berths and the deck beneath them shall not be less than six inches, nor
the interval between each tier of berths, and the interval between the
uppermost tier and the deck above it, less than two feet six inches; and
each berth shall be occupied by not more than one passenger over eight
years of age; but double berths of twice the above-mentioned width may
be provided, each double berth to be occupied by no more and by none
other than two women, or by one woman and two children under the age of
eight years, or by husband and wife, or by a man and two of his own
children under the age of eight years, or by two men personally
acquainted with each other. All the male passengers upwards of fourteen
years of age who do not occupy berths with their wives shall be berthed
in the fore part of the vessel, in a compartment divided off from the
space or spaces appropriated to the other passengers by a substantial
and well-secured bulkhead; and unmarried female passengers shall be
berthed in a compartment separated from the spaces occupied by other
passengers by a substantial and well-constructed bulkhead, the opening
or communication from which to an adjoining passenger space shall be so
constructed that it can be closed and secured. Families, however, shall
not be separated except with their consent. Each berth shall be numbered
serially, on the outside berth-board, according to the number of
passengers that may lawfully occupy the berth; and the berths occupied
by such passengers shall not be removed or taken down until the
expiration of twelve hours from the time of entry, unless previously
inspected within a shorter period. For any violation of either of the
provisions of this section the master of the vessel shall be liable to a
fine of five dollars for each passenger carried or brought on the
vessel. (Aug. 2, 1882; sec. 2.)


Light and air.

Every such steamship or other vessel shall have adequate provisions for
affording light and air to the passenger-decks and to the compartments
and spaces occupied by such passengers, and with adequate means and
appliances for ventilating the said compartments and spaces. To
compartments having sufficient space for fifty or more of such
passengers at least two ventilators, each not less than twelve inches in
diameter, shall be provided, one of which ventilators shall be inserted
in the forward part of the compartment, and the other in the after part
thereof, and shall be so constructed as to ventilate the compartment;
and additional ventilators shall be provided for each compartment in the
proportion of two ventilators for each additional fifty of such
passengers carried or brought in the compartment. All ventilators shall
be carried at least six feet above the uppermost deck of the vessel, and
shall be of the most approved form and construction. In any steamship
the ventilating apparatus provided, or any method of ventilation adopted
thereon, which has been approved by the proper emigration officers at
the port or place from which said vessel was cleared, shall be deemed a
compliance with the foregoing provisions; and in all vessels carrying or
bringing such passengers there shall be properly-constructed hatchways
over the compartments or spaces occupied by such passengers, which
hatchway shall be properly covered with houses or booby hatches, and the
coamings or sills of which shall rise at least six inches above the
deck; and there shall be proper companion-ways or ladders from each
hatchway leading to the compartments or spaces occupied by such
passengers; and the said companion-ways or ladders shall be securely
constructed, and be provided with hand-rails or strong rope, and, when
the weather will permit, such passengers shall have the use of each
hatchway situated over the compartments or spaces appropriated to their
use; and every vessel carrying or bringing such passengers shall have a
properly located and constructed caboose and cooking-range, or other
cooking apparatus, the dimensions and capacity of which shall be
sufficient to provide for properly cooking and preparing the food of all
such passengers. In every vessel carrying or bringing such passengers
there shall be at least two water-closets or privies, and an additional
water-closet or privy for every one hundred male passengers on board,
for the exclusive use of such male passengers, and an additional
water-closet or privy for every fifty female passengers on board, for
the exclusive use of the female passengers and young children on board.
The aforesaid water-closets and privies shall be properly enclosed and
located on each side of the vessel, and shall be separated from
passengers' spaces by substantial and properly-constructed partitions or
bulkheads; and the water-closets and privies shall be kept and
maintained in a serviceable and cleanly condition throughout the voyage.
For any violation of either of the provisions of this section, or for
any neglect to conform to the requirements thereof, the master of the
vessel shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding two hundred and fifty
dollars. (Sec. 3.)


Provisions.

An allowance of good, wholesome, and proper food, with a reasonable
quantity of fresh provisions, which food shall be equal in value to one
and a half navy rations of the United States, and of fresh water, not
less than four quarts per day, shall be furnished each of such
passengers. Three meals shall be served daily, at regular and stated
hours, of which hours sufficient notice shall be given. If any such
passengers shall at any time during the voyage be put on short allowance
for food and water, the master of the vessel shall pay to each passenger
three dollars for each and every day the passenger may have been put on
short allowance, except in case of accidents, where the captain is
obliged to put the passengers on short allowance. Mothers with infants
and young children shall be furnished the necessary quantity of
wholesome milk or condensed milk for the sustenance of the latter.
Tables and seats shall be provided for the use of passengers at regular
meals. And for every willful violation of any of the provisions of this
section the master of the vessel shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars, and be imprisoned
for a term not exceeding six months. The enforcement of this penalty,
however, shall not affect the civil responsibility of the master and
owners of the vessel to such passengers as may have suffered from any
negligence, breach of contract, or default on the part of such masters
and owners. (Sec. 4.)


Medical attendance.

In every such steamship or other vessel there shall be properly built
and secured, or divided off from other spaces, two compartments or
spaces to be used exclusively as hospitals for such passengers, one for
men and the other for women. The hospitals shall be located in a space
not below the deck next below the main deck of the vessel. The hospital
spaces shall in no case be less than in the proportion of eighteen clear
superficial feet for every fifty such passengers who are carried or
brought on the vessel, and such hospitals shall be supplied with proper
beds, bedding, and utensils, and be kept so supplied throughout the
voyage. And every steamship or other vessel carrying or bringing
emigrant passengers, or passengers other than cabin passengers,
exceeding fifty in number, shall carry a duly qualified and competent
surgeon or medical practitioner, who shall be rated as such in the
ship's articles, and who shall be provided with surgical instruments,
medical comforts, and medicines proper and necessary for diseases and
accidents incident to sea-voyages, and for the proper medical treatment
of such passengers during the voyage, and with such articles of food and
nourishment as may be proper and necessary for preserving the health of
infants and young children; and the services of such surgeon or medical
practitioner shall be promptly given, in any case of sickness or
disease, to any of the passengers, or to any infant or young child of
any such passengers, who may need his services. For a violation of
either of the provisions of this section the master of the vessel shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars.
(Sec. 5.)


Discipline and cleanliness.

The master of every such steamship or other vessel is authorized to
maintain good discipline and such habits of cleanliness among such
passengers as will tend to the preservation and promotion of health, and
to that end he shall cause such regulations as he may adopt for such
purpose to be posted up on board the vessel, in a place or places
accessible to such passengers, and shall keep the same so posted up
during the voyage. The said master shall cause the compartments and
spaces provided for, or occupied by, such passengers to be kept at all
times in a clean and healthy condition, and to be, as often as may be
necessary, disinfected with chloride of lime, or by some other equally
efficient disinfectant. Whenever the state of the weather will permit,
such passengers and their bedding shall be mustered on deck, and a clear
and sufficient space on the main or any upper deck of the vessel shall
be set apart, and so kept, for the use and exercise of such passengers
during the voyage. For each neglect or violation of any of the
provisions of this section the master of the vessel shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars. (Sec. 6.)


Privacy of passengers.

Neither the officers, seamen, nor other persons employed on any such
steamship or other vessel shall visit or frequent any part of the vessel
provided or assigned to the use of such passengers, except by the
direction or permission of the master of such vessel first made or given
for such purpose; and every officer, seaman, or other person employed on
board of such vessel who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be fined not exceeding
one hundred dollars, and be imprisoned not exceeding twenty days, for
each violation; and the master of such vessel who directs or permits any
officer, seaman, or other person employed on board the vessel to visit
or frequent any part of the vessel provided for or assigned to the use
of such passengers, or the compartments or spaces occupied by such
passengers, except for the purpose of doing or performing some necessary
act or duty as an officer, seaman, or other person employed on board of
the vessel, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be fined
not more than one hundred dollars for each time he directs or permits
the provisions of this section to be violated. A copy of this section,
written or printed in the language or principal languages of the
passengers on board, shall, by or under the direction of the master of
the vessel, be posted in a conspicuous place on the forecastle and in
the several parts of the vessel provided and assigned for the use of
such passengers, and in each compartment or space occupied by such
passengers, and the same shall be kept so posted during the voyage; and
if the said master neglects so to do, he shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars. (Sec.
7.)


Explosives; cattle.

It shall not be lawful to take, carry, or have on board of any such
steamship or other vessel any nitro-glycerine, dynamite, or any other
explosive article or compound, nor any vitriol or like acids, nor
gunpowder, except for the ship's use, nor any article or number of
articles, whether as a cargo or ballast, which, by reason of the nature
or quantity or mode of storage thereof, shall, either singly or
collectively, be likely to endanger the health or lives of the
passengers or the safety of the vessel, and horses, cattle, or other
animals taken on board of or brought in any such vessel shall not be
carried on any deck below the deck on which passengers are berthed, nor
in any compartment in which passengers are berthed, nor in any adjoining
compartment except in a vessel built of iron, and of which the
compartments are divided off by water-tight bulkheads extending to the
upper deck. For every violation of any of the provisions of this section
the master of the vessel shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
shall be fined not exceeding one thousand dollars, and be imprisoned for
a period not exceeding one year. (Sec. 8.)


Boarding vessel; passenger list.

It shall not be lawful for the master of any such steamship or other
vessel, not in distress, after the arrival of the vessel within any
collection district of the United States, to allow any person or persons
except a pilot, officer of the customs, or health officer, agents of the
vessel, and consuls, to come on board of the vessel, or to leave the
vessel, until the vessel has been taken in charge by an officer of the
customs, nor, after charge so taken, without leave of such officer,
until all the passengers, with their baggage, have been duly landed from
the vessel; and on the arrival of any such steamship or other vessel
within any collection district of the United States, the master shall
submit for inspection to the officer of customs who first makes demand
therefor, and shall subsequently deliver with his manifest of cargo on
entry, a correct list, signed and verified on oath by the master, of all
passengers taken on board the vessel at any foreign port or place,
specifying, in the manner to be prescribed from time to time by the
Secretary of Commerce, the name of each passenger, age (if a child of
eight years or under), sex, married or single, location of compartment
or space occupied during the voyage (if the passenger be other than a
cabin passenger), whether a citizen of the United States, number of
pieces of baggage, and if any passenger die on the voyage the list shall
specify the name, age, and cause of death of each deceased passenger.
For a violation of either of the provisions of this section, or for
permitting or neglecting to prevent a violation thereof, the master of
the vessel shall be liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars.
(Feb. 9, 1905; sec. 9.)

The Secretary of Commerce is hereby authorized and directed to prescribe
from time to time and enforce regulations governing the boarding of
vessels arriving at the seaports of the United States, before such
vessels have been properly inspected and placed in security, and for
that purpose to employ any of the officers of that Department. (Mar. 31,
1900; Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)

Each person violating such regulations shall be subject to a penalty of
not more than one hundred dollars or imprisonment not to exceed six
months, or both, in the discretion of the court. (Mar. 31,  1900;
sec. 2.)

This Act shall be construed as supplementary to section nine of chapter
three hundred and seventy-four of the Statutes of eighteen hundred and
eighty-two, and section forty-six hundred and six of the Revised
Statutes, (sec. 3.)

Each and every collector of customs to whom shall be delivered the
manifests or lists of passengers prescribed by the twelfth section of
the act aforesaid, approved March third, eighteen hundred and
fifty-five, shall make returns from such manifests or lists of
passengers to the Secretary of Commerce of the United States, in such
manner as shall be prescribed by that officer, under whose direction
statements of the same shall be prepared and published. (May. 7, 1874;
Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)


Death of passenger.

In case there shall have occurred on board any such steamship or other
vessel any death among such passengers during the voyage, the master or
consignees of the vessel shall, within forty-eight hours after the
arrival of the vessel within a collection district of the United States,
or within twenty-four hours after the entry of the vessel, pay to the
collector of customs of such district the sum of ten dollars for each
and every such passenger above the age of eight years who shall have
died on the voyage by natural disease; and the master or consignees of
any vessel who neglect or refuse to pay such collector, within the times
hereinbefore prescribed, the sums of money aforesaid, shall be liable to
a penalty of fifty dollars in addition to the sum required to be paid as
aforesaid for each passenger whose death occurred on the voyage. All
sums of money paid to any collector under the provisions of this section
shall be by him paid into the Treasury of the United States in such
manner and under such regulations as shall be prescribed by the
Secretary of the Treasury. (Aug. 2, 1882; sec. 10.)


Inspection.

The collector of customs of the collection district within which, or the
surveyor of the port at which, any such steamship or other vessel
arrives, shall direct an inspector or other officer of the customs to
make an examination of the vessel, and to admeasure the compartments or
spaces occupied by the emigrant passengers, or passengers other than
cabin passengers, during the voyage; and such measurement shall be made
in the manner provided by law for admeasuring vessels for tonnage; and
to compare the number of such passengers found on board with the list of
such passengers furnished by the master to the customs officer; and the
said inspector or other officer shall make a report to the aforesaid
collector or surveyor, stating the port of departure, the time of
sailing, the length of the voyage, the ventilation, the number of such
passengers on board the vessel, and their native country, respectively;
the cubic quantity of each compartment or space, and the number of
berths and passengers in each space, the kind and quality of the food
furnished to such passengers on the voyage; the number of deaths, and
the age and sex of those who died during the voyage, and of what
disease; and in case there was any unusual sickness or mortality during
the voyage, to report whether the same was caused by any neglect or
violation of the provisions of this act, or by the want of proper care
against disease by the master or owners of the vessel; and the said
reports shall be forwarded to the Secretary of Commerce at such times
and in such manner as he shall direct. (Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)


Penalties.

The provisions of this act shall apply to every steamship or other
vessel whereon emigrant passengers, or passengers other than cabin
passengers are taken on board at a port or place in the United States
for conveyance to any port or place in a foreign country except foreign
territory contiguous to the United States, and shall also apply to any
vessel whereon such passengers are taken on board at any port or place
of the United States on the Atlantic Ocean or its tributaries for
conveyance to a port or place on the Pacific Ocean or its tributaries,
or vice versa; and whether the voyage of said vessel is to be continuous
from port to port or such passengers are to be conveyed from port to
port in part by the way of any overland route through Mexico or Central
America; and the said collector of customs may direct an examination of
the vessel to be made by an inspector or other officer of the customs,
who shall make the examination and report whether the provisions of this
act have been complied with in respect to such vessel, and the said
collector is authorized to withhold the clearance of such vessel until
the coming in of such report; and if the said report shall show that any
of the provisions of this act have not been complied with, the collector
is authorized and directed to withhold the clearance of such vessel
until the said provisions are complied with, and if any such vessel
leaves the aforesaid port or place without having been duly cleared by
the collector of customs, the master shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and may be fined not exceeding one thousand dollars, and be
imprisoned not exceeding one year, and the vessel shall be liable to
seizure and forfeiture. (Aug. 2, 1882; sec. 12.)

The amount of the several fines and penalties imposed by any section of
this act upon the master of any steamship or other vessel carrying or
bringing emigrant passengers, or passengers other than cabin passengers,
for any violation of the provisions of this act, shall be liens upon
such vessel, and such vessel may be libeled therefor in any district
court of the United States where such vessel shall arrive or depart.
(Sec. 13.)


Carriage of passengers.

The inspectors shall state in every certificate of inspection granted to
steamers carrying passengers, other than ferryboats, the number of
passengers of each class that any such steamer has accommodations for,
and can carry with prudence and safety. (R. S., 4464).

It shall not be lawful to take on board of any steamer a greater number
of passengers than is stated in the certificate of inspection; and for
every violation of this provision the master or owner shall be liable,
to any person suing for the same, to forfeit the amount of passage-money
and ten dollars for each passenger beyond the number allowed. (R. S.,
4465.)

Every steam vessel licensed under the foregoing section shall carry and
have on board, in accessible places, one life-preserver for every person
allowed to be carried, in addition to those provided for the crew of
such vessel. (July 9, 1886; sec. 2.)




CHAPTER XI

THE SECOND MATE


+Watches.+ The Second Mate of an ocean steamer is always a watch
officer, that is, he is in responsible charge of a watch at sea, and
where the Chief, Second, and Third Mates, stand the watches, his watch
is generally taken from Noon until 4 P.M., and from Midnight to 4 A.M.,
or he stands the afternoon and the mid watches.

+Hold Duty.+ The Second Mate is in charge of the after holds. His
duties, under the Chief Mate, are those outlined in the duties and
responsibilities of that officer. The Second Mate is the understudy of
the Chief Mate and should diligently prepare himself to take up the work
of that position. The Second Mate who is fortunate enough to be
shipmates with a top-notch first officer, should improve every
opportunity to study his superior and to perfect himself in the
difficult duty of the station next ahead.

+Coming Alongside.+ In coming alongside, coming to anchor, docking,
etc., the Second Mate is in charge aft.

He should note the clearance of the propellers, and should promptly
report by voice or telegraph, or by messenger, when anything in his end
of the ship requires the attention of the Master on the bridge.

A quartermaster, with semaphore flags, is a handy means of communicating
with the bridge while docking. Red and white lights are sometimes used
while docking at night.

The station aft is in many respects the most important in the vessel
while coming along side, and intelligent handling of the lines and men
soon stamps an officer as well qualified in his profession.

He should use judgment in sending ashore, or "heaving," small lines, as
the attempt to put a heaving line across too great a distance often
results in dangerous delays, and leads to confusion.

He should see the cork fenders handy, with men told off to handle them.
He should study the men assigned to his end of the ship and place only
reliable men at the capstans and bits. A man who can properly "surge" a
seven-inch line, under heavy strain is a rarity these days.

He should understand, and have men ready, for the throwing in and
operating of the hand-steering gear in case of emergency.

+Cargo Gear.+ The after cargo gear, is generally under the charge of the
Second Mate, and he is in charge of the opening and closing of the after
cargo hatches.

+Baggage.+ The Second Mate is generally in charge of the handling and
care of heavy baggage, in vessels in the passenger trade. This is
important duty, and calls for care and dispatch. Such baggage is whipped
ashore as fast as possible so that the customs inspectors are not
delayed.

+Mail.+ The Second Mate is also charged with the handling and stowage of
the mail sacks—unless in a very large liner where special mail clerks
attend to this duty.

+Navigating Officer.+ The Second Mate is sometimes designated the
"Navigating Officer," that is, he is charged with the special care of
the navigating equipment. Corrects charts from the "Notices to Mariners"
and assists the Master generally in the navigating duty. He may be
required to wind the chronometers each morning at eight bells and report
them wound to the Master, though when standing the mid watch, this duty
is usually attended to by the Master himself, who, in the Merchant
Service is the responsible navigating officer of his vessel.

The Second Mate corrects the ship's clocks for difference of Longitude
to noon.

However, the naming of the Second Mate, as navigating officer has much
to commend it. He then has special duties, and is charged with the
complete supervision of the compasses, sounding machines, instruments,
lead lines, patent logs and log lines. He should perfect himself in the
science of navigation and master the simple (and to many) mysterious
principles of compass adjustment. He should be in charge of the
deviation log and prepare the deviation tables for each loading and
voyage.




CHAPTER XII

THE THIRD MATE


+Watches.+ The Third Mate of an ocean steamer is generally a watch
officer. If the vessel is of any size, and the three mates stand watch,
the watch from eight to noon and from eight to midnight, is usually
assigned to the Third Mate. This is one of the best watches, and the
watch during which the Master is most likely to be up and about. As the
junior watch officer is the least experienced, it is best that he have
the Master close at hand in the event of anything unusual occurring.

+Hold Duty.+ The Third Mate is generally given charge of the forward
holds, under the immediate supervision of the Chief Mate. Here his
duties are those outlined in the chapter headed Chief Mate. He is
directly under the mate and should use every effort to familiarize
himself with his duties and with the vessel. He should carry out all
orders to the letter, and aim to perfect himself in the many branches of
seamanship and navigation. The duty to cargo, and the hold duty is one
of his most important charges.

+Coming Alongside.+ When coming alongside, or to anchor, or when
docking, the Third Mate is stationed on the bridge with the Master. He
usually attends to the telegraph, cons the quartermaster at the wheel
and looks out for the work on the bridge generally. This post is one of
special importance for the young officer as he gets, from close
observation, a splendid opportunity to observe and learn the details of
ship handling. He sees the mistakes made fore and aft, in the handling
of lines, etc., and can, if he will, profit by this experience.

+Gangway.+ The Third Mate is usually charged with the getting in and out
of the gangway, and with the safe embarkation of passengers. He must
keep order, and note who comes on board, and what their business is
while the vessel is being permanently secured or anchored, and before
the regular gangway watch is set.

+Signal Officer.+ While the duty is not generally assigned, it is a good
plan to designate the Third Mate as "Signal Officer." This charges him
with the care and use of the signal flags and other apparatus, and he
should perfect himself in their rapid and accurate use.

The Third Mate should master the hand semaphore signals and should see
that at least two of the quartermasters are adept at this form of
communication. Such knowledge is of the greatest use when in convoy with
men-of-war, and can be made use of in a hundred different ways while
lying at anchor, or when communicating with other vessels or the shore.
So many seamen are now familiar with the semaphore alphabet that it has
become one of the handiest means of talking at sea over moderate
distances, and its use at once stamps a vessel as being up to time.

He should also know the Morse Code and be able to send and read by the
blinker or Morse lamp.

This is used in convoy work instead of wireless.

+Bridge.+ The bridge, and the duties of the quartermasters on the bridge
and bridge deck, are generally delegated to the Third Mate, or to any
officer who may be junior to him. This means general upkeep and order. A
well-regulated and well-kept up bridge is a joy—the reverse is all too
common.




CHAPTER XIII

THE JUNIOR OFFICERS


Most vessels now carry one or more junior officers, young men who have
some sea experience and who have prepared themselves to a certain extent
in navigation. Many of them come on board ship with a very hazy idea as
to what it is all about. They are willing enough, but don't know where
to begin. They would be glad to tail onto the starboard main t'gallant
buntline, but don't know just where it is.

For such as these, the following random +Things to Do+ and to learn
about are suggested:

+Do the things you are told to do, then—+

+1. Find our what quartermasters are doing.+

+2. Look after hand leads and lines, are they marked
    correctly—accurately?+

+3. See that log is ready for streaming, as soon as past the light ship,
    or other mark.+

+4. Find switch for running lights—are they in order?+

+5. Look up log book, see how it is kept, and if up to date.+

+6. See that note book on the bridge is handy.+

+7. See if the clock in the wheel house and chart room is correct.+

+8. Work up the chronometer error.+

+9. See that the bridge dodgers are properly bent, and are clean.+

+10. See that the binoculars and telescopes on the bridge are in their
     proper places and are clean.+

+11. Find out where the Coston lights are kept.+

+12. Find out what are red and what are blue lights, how many on board?+

+13. See that the binnacle lights are in working order.+

+14. See that the automatic fog whistle control works; how often does it
     blow when set—is it according to law?+

+15. See if the whistle works, don't pull it unless the Chief Mate or
     the Master says so.+

+16. Try out the engine room telegraph—the docking telegraph—after
     notifying the Chief that you intend doing so and on order of the
     Mate or Master.+

+17. Find out what kind of signals are used between the crow's nest and
     the bridge. The fo'c'sle head and the bridge.+

+18. Find out if the crow's nest lookout uses glasses—what kind—where
     kept.+

+19. Find out what sort of sounding machine is used—how it works—what
     kind of tubes are used—where the depth scale is kept—where the
     tubes are kept. Look at the "leads" see if they are "armed," see if
     there is plenty of "arming" handy. What kind—soap or tallow?+

+20. Overhaul the bridge chests—signal—navigating—put them in better
     order than you found them.+

+21. Look after the patent log—the lines—the rotators.+

+22. Become familiar with the entire bridge. Know the use of everything
     on it.+

+23. How are the compasses adjusted? Rectangular magnets, or single
     magnet?+

+24. Has the ship a Flinder's bar? Where is it? What is it? Why?+

+25. What are the quadrantal correctors? What do they correct?+

+26. Where are the distress rockets? Are they fastened to their sticks?
     Where are the sticks? When are they used? How?+

+27. Where is the line-throwing gun? How is it used? Where is the
     projectile? Where is the line? What kind of line is it? Why?+

+28. How many lifeboats are on board. How many rafts? How many ring
     buoys? How many life preservers? Why?+

+29. What is the required equipment of a lifeboat? See if all of this is
     in the lifeboat to which you are assigned on the station bill.+

+30. What is the equipment of a life raft? How is it stowed? How
     launched?+

+31. What is your station, at abandon ship? Who is in your boat?
     What do they look like? Take a look at the crew assigned to
     your boat—know them.+

+32. What kind of davits are used?+

+33. What kind of releasing gear is used?+

+34. Are the gripes easily cast off? Are the falls clear? Are they in
     tubs, as required by law?+

+35. What are your duties in case of fire? In case of fire in the holds,
     to cargo. Find out about this.+

+36. If the wharf caught fire, and everyone was ashore, that is, all the
     officers, but yourself. What would you do? Think over it.+

+37. Where do the seamen live, the firemen, the stewards? Where is the
     "glory hole"?+

+38. What are the duties of the boatswain?+

+39. What are the duties of the carpenter?+

+40. What are the duties of the quartermasters?+

+41. Learn the details of the complete economy of the vessels. How the
     crew and passengers are fed, where they mess, where stores are
     kept?+

+42. Learn the routine in your department. Why are things done as they
     are?+

+43. What is the ship's draft? How is it recorded?+

+44. Where are the sounding pipes? Look up the framed sectional blue
     print of the vessel that ought to be framed in the chart room.+

+45. What is the tons per inch scale?+

+46. What is the displacement of the vessel?+

+47. Learn her complete dimensions.+

 +Length between perpendiculars.+
 +Length over all.+
 +Depth of hold.+
 +Moulded depth.+
 +Beam.+
 +Freeboard, allowed by underwriters (draft).+
 +Gross tonnage.+
 +Net tonnage.+
 +Horse-power.+
 +Speed.+
 +Coal consumption.+
 +Her most economical speed, and tons per day.+
 +Her hold capacity. Holds and 'tween decks.+
 +Her tank capacity.+
 +Her bunker capacity.+
 +Her engines. I.H.P. type.+
 +Her boilers, number, type.+
 +Her wireless. Range.+

+48. What is the vessel's signal number?+

+49. What is her hailing port?+

+50. What is her rating, when given?+

+51. When built? By whom? Kind of construction?+

+52. Look up old log books if available. Speed under different kinds of
     weather conditions.+

+53. Has she bilge keels?+

+54. What kind of propellers, or propeller? Material? Pitch? Right
     handed or left? How will it send the vessel's head—going
     ahead—backing?+

+55. Learn everything you can about her construction, and equipment.+

+56. What is her draft when light—holds empty? What is her stability
     when in this condition? Is her propeller out of water in that
     condition? How much? What is her light displacement? How can you
     determine her stability—by means of shifting weights on deck?+

+57. How many cubic feet to a ton of bunker coal?+

+58. How many pounds to a cubic foot of sea water? Fresh water?+

+59. How do you figure the cubic capacity of a lifeboat? How many cubic
     feet allowed per person?+

+60. What is the strength of a new six-inch manila line? Of a five-inch
     wire hawser?+

+61. What is the tensile strength of mild steel? Of cast iron? The
     compressive strength?+

+62. Can you figure out the safe load for a steel boom under given
     conditions? Shell and stiffening given, supports and angle given?
     Safety factor 5.+

+63. Become familiar with the fittings of the holds. Go in, look around
     and study out the plan of construction and use.+

+64. Find out the location and use of the following parts—+

     +Limbers.+
     +Limber boards.+
     +Ceiling.+
     +Cargo battens.+
     +Rose boxes (strums, also strainers).+
     +Intercostal plates.+
     +Keelson.+
     +Stringers.+
     +Framing.+
     +Beams.+
     +Shell plating.+
     +Pillars.+
     +Bulkheads.+
     +Tanks.+
     +Bilges.+
     +Smothering lines.+
     +Sounding pipes.+
     +Fire lines.+
     +Light connections.+
     +Mast partners.+
     +Mast wedges.+
     +Shaft trunk.+
     +Hatch coamings.+
     +Hatch strong backs.+
     +Hatch fore and afters.+
     +Hatch battens.+
     +Hatch covers.+
     +Wedges.+

+65. Where do the steam pipes lead into the holds?+

+66. Where are the valves located? Which is which?+

+67. Where are the plugs for cargo clusters?+

+68. Where are the cargo clusters kept? How many are there?+

+69. Are they all in good condition?+

+70. How much dunnage wood in the holds?+

+71. What cargo was carried last?+

+72. What cargo loading or coming in?+

+73. How much and what kind of dunnage will be needed?+

+74. Who is the boss stevedore? Watch him.+

+75. Note where each ventilator leads to.+

+76. Get acquainted with the deck engineers.+

+77. What kind of winches are used?+

+78. Get familiar with all details of the cargo handling gear. How many
     booms, capacity? Is gear rove off on steel boom? Where is it
     stowed? In what condition? How is it rigged?+

+79. How many hawsers in the vessel? Where stowed? In what condition?+

+80.  How many wires in the vessel? What size? Where and how stowed?+

+81. How does hand steering gear work? What type of steering engine? How
     is it locked when shifting from steam to hand?+

+82. Are there wave oil tanks? Where? How is flow of oil controlled?
     What kind of oil is used? How much on board? How much required by
     law?+

+83. Where are the following lockers, and what do they contain?+

     +Boatswain's.+
     +Paint.+
     +Lamp.+
     +Sail.+

+84. Is there a steam line running into the paint and lamp lockers for
     smothering fire?+

+85. What kind of windlass is fitted? How does it work by hand? How many
     men needed to weight anchor by hand?+

+86. Do the gangways abreast of cargo hatches turn in, lift out, or are
     the rails and bulwarks stationary? Are the freeing ports well oiled
     and loose?+

+87. Where is the ice plant? What hatch?+

+88. Where is the washdeck gear kept? Are reducers fitted on salt water
     line for inch and a half wash deck hose?+

+89. Where is the sand locker?+

+90. Has the vessel range lights?+

+91. Learn the names and condition of the stays and shrouds. What strain
     do they bear—ordinarily—when lifting heavy weights?+

+92. What kind of coaling gear is used?+

+93. Has the vessel a sea anchor? Was it over used?+

+94. Examine the turnbuckle screws in the rigging. Are they covered with
     canvas? How old? Are they whiteleaded and tallowed?+

+95. Where are the slings, chain and rope kept? In what condition? How
     many?+

+96. How many net slings on board? What condition?+

+97. What happens when metal becomes fatigued? Where is this liable to
     happen? What is a crystalline fracture?+

+98. What kind of wood in the decks? In the margin or waterway planks?
     Know Oregon pine—pitch pine—yellow pine—teak, when you see it.+

+99. How are decks caulked? What kind of filler is used—pitch—marine
     glue?+

+100. What do you know about the following parts of a steamer? Of her
      fittings, etc.?+

      +Anchor davits?+
      +Anchors?+
      +Awning deck?+
      +Ballast—water—dry?+
      +Beams—camber of—duty of—theory of—spacing—strength—types?+
      +Bilges—bilge keels?+
      +Boat chocks. Davits—cranes?+
      +Bollards? How many, etc?+
      +Bow—different kinds—framing?+
      +Breast hooks?+
      +Bridge—locations—names, etc.?+
      +Buckled—plates—spars?+
      +Bulkheads? How many—what kind—where?+
      +Bull rope?+
      +Bulwarks?+
      +Bunkers—how many—what capacity—where?+
      +Buoyancy? What is it? Reserve buoyancy?+
      +Bureau veritas? What is it? What does it do?+
      +Buttock lines?+
      +Buttstraps?+
      +Cables—size—weight—strength—studs—marking—shackles—
         forelocks—swivels?+
      +Cant frames (old dagger knees)?+
      +Cantilever principle—where used?+
      +Capstans—where—how many—what uses?+
      +Cargo—a big subject—takes a year or two to master it.+
      +Catheads?+
      +Cattle steamers—guards—footlocks, etc?+
      +Caulking—tools—materials? Steel plates—wood decks? Ceiling?+
      +Cement—hydraulic—asphaltic?+
      +Chain—slings—for clearing limbers, etc.?+
      +Chart house?+
      +Cheek plates?+
      +Circulating pumps?+
      +Coaling hatches—ports—chutes?+
      +Coamings?+
      +Coefficient of fineness?+
      +Commercial efficiency of a vessel?+
      +Composite construction?+
      +Corrosion—where most prevalent—how to keep down?+
      +Dead weight cargo? also measurement cargo?+
      +Decks—how many—where—what purpose?+
      +Derricks? How many?+
      +Docking—stresses—all—data?+
      +Dolly—what is it?+
      +Donkey boiler—where—why?+
      +Doors—water-tight—where—how closed—how controlled?+
      +Double bottom? See plans—study.+
      +Doubling plates? Where?+
      +Drain holes—in bottom?+
      +Elastic limit—of materials used in construction of vessel?+
      +Electric welding—how—how strong?+
      +Engine—learn all you can about it.+
      +Escape holes—for trimmers?+
      +Expansion joints—bends—trunks?+
      +Fair leads?+
      +Fans?+
      +Fiddley?+
      +Floors—rise of?+
      +Flush deck?+
      +Fore foot?+
      +Forgings?+
      +Frames?—look them over when in the hold.+
        +What are+
          +Z bars?+
          +Bulb angles?+
          +Channel bars?+
          +Web frames?+
          +Reverse frames?+
          +Transome frames?+
      +Freeboard? How determined?+
      +Freeing ports—percentage of in bulwarks?+
      +Frictional, or skin resistance?+
      +Galley? Where—how many?+
      +Garboard strake?+
      +Girders?+
      +Grain bulkheads?+
      +Gudgeons?+
      +Gunwale?+
      +Gutters?+
      +Half beams?+
      +Hatches—how many—where—names? Booby hatch?+
      +Hawse pipes? Clearing hawse?+
      +Heeling?+
      +Hogging?+
      +Hydraulic derricks—principle?+
      +Insulation of holds?+
      +Isherwood system of framing?+
      +Jogged framing?+
      +Jib-booms?+
      +Keel—kind, plate, bilge?+
      +Keelson? Where—why?+
      +Knighthead frame?+
      +Lapped joints?+
      +Launching—how done?+
      +Limbers—limber boards?+
      +Lloyd's—register—rules?+
      +Load line?+
      +Longitudinal bulkheads—framing?+
      +Manholes—where—why?+
      +Margin plates?+
      +Masts—caps—coats—holes—partners—steps—stiffeners—telescopic—
         wedges? Bending forces—Buckling—failure—material—painting
         interior—rake—strength of?+
      +Natural draft?+
      +Neutral axis of a beam?+
      +Oil fuel—flash point?+
      +Oxy-acetylene blow pipe—how used?+
      +Paints—what kind used aboard ship—how mixed? Where stowed—
         How much used? What surface will gallon cover? How long
         in applying?+
      +Panting—what is it—have you noticed it at sea, etc.?+
      +Peak tanks—fore peak—what stowed there?+
      +Pillars—stations, etc? Their function?+
      +Pintles?+
      +Plating—how thick—how joined?+
      +Portland cement—same as hydraulic—what uses?+
      +Pratigue—what is it?+
      +Propellers—how many—what kind—pitch—motion?+
      +Pressure—steam—in deck lines—main boilers—donkey boilers—water
         pressure—under bottom?+
      +Pumps—where are hand pumps—what will they throw—do they work?+
      +Quadrant tiller—how connected to steering engine?+
      +Red lead—use of?+
      +Relieving tackles for steering gear—how rove?+
      +Rigging—chain plates—screws—spread of—strength of?+
      +Rivets—in what kind of shear? Pitch—strength?+
      +Rolling chocks (bilge keels)?+
      +Rudder—angle of—balanced, or not—cross head—how supported?+
      +Sanitary tanks—where located—how filled?+
      +Scuppers where located? Are those on deck house tops clear?+
      +Scantlings—what do they include?+
      +Shaft—bearings—stools—tube—tunnel?+
      +Sheathing—wood—copper?+
      +Sheer?+
      +Shell plating?+
      +Skylights?+
      +Sounding pipes—rods—how marked—how used?+
      +Spar deck?+
      +Sponsons?+
      +Steel strength of—tensile—shearing—compressive?+
      +Stem?+
      +Steering gear—learn all about it.+
      +Stem—ordinary—cruiser?+
      +Stoke holds (fire rooms)?+
      +Stress?+
      +Strain?+
      +Stringers? Duty of?+
      +Surveys—purpose—by whom?+
      +Sweating—cork paint?+
      +Tail shaft—where—after gland—what?+
      +Tanks—how lined—where?+
      +Thrust block?+
      +Ventilation—how accomplished—natural or blower?+
      +Vibration?—note it at sea.+
      +Water ballast—part of tank data?+
      +Water line?+
      +Water-tight doors—where—how managed?+
      +Well decks?+
      +Winches?+
      +Yards—if any?+
      +Zincs—what used for—why?+

A young officer must become an enthusiast about a vessel; everything on
board must be known to him, if he cares to rise in his profession.




CHAPTER XIV

CADETS


Under the laws establishing an ocean mail service certain vessels so
engaged are required to carry cadets.

Excerpts from this law follow:


"OCEAN MAIL SERVICE

"Said vessels shall take, as cadets or apprentices, one American-born
boy, under twenty-one years of age for each one thousand tons gross
register, and one for each majority fraction thereof, who shall be
educated in the duties of seamanship, rank as petty officers, and
receive such pay for their services as may be reasonable."

The system of carrying cadets is sound in principle, but in many
instances the law has been carried out according to a peculiar
interpretation of the phrase "+Shall be educated in the duties of
seamanship+."

Education is a term of wide meaning, but "seamanship" or the "Duties of
Seamanship" is at least fairly definite. The whole cadet system should
be put upon a definite basis of regular instruction, or else be done
away with.

Many of us can remember a scouting party hurrying across West Street to
pick up a "cadet" or two, so the good ship could go to sea in full
compliance with the law.




CHAPTER XV

LAWS DEFINING OFFICERS OF MERCHANT VESSELS


Citizenship of officers.

All the officers of vessels of the United States who shall have charge
of a watch, including pilots, shall in all cases be citizens of the
United States. [Metlakahtla Indians excepted by act, March 4, 1907.] (R.
S., 4131.)

The word "officers" shall include the chief engineer and each assistant
engineer in charge of a watch on vessels propelled wholly or in part by
steam; and after the first day of January, eighteen hundred and
ninety-seven, no person shall be qualified to hold a license as a
commander or watch officer of a merchant vessel of the United States who
is not a native-born citizen, or whose naturalization as a citizen shall
not have been fully completed. (May 28, 1896; sec. 1.)

In cases where on a foreign voyage, or on a voyage from an Atlantic to a
Pacific port of the United States, any such vessel is for any reason
deprived of the services of an officer below the grade of master, his
place, or a vacancy caused by the promotion of another officer to such
place, may be supplied by a person not a citizen of the United States
until the first return of such vessel to its home port; and such vessel
shall not be liable to any penalty or penal tax for such employment of
an alien officer. (June 26, 1884; sec. 1; May 28, 1896; sec. 3.)

The President of the United States is hereby authorized, whenever in his
discretion the needs of foreign commerce may require, to suspend by
order, so far and for such length of time as he may deem desirable, the
provisions of law prescribing that all the watch officers of vessels of
the United States registered for foreign trade shall be citizens of the
United States. (Aug. 18, 1914; sec. 2.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The provisions of law prescribing that the watch officers of vessels of
the United States registered for foreign trade shall be citizens of the
United States are hereby suspended so far and for such length of time as
is herein provided, namely: All foreign-built ships which shall be
admitted to United States registry under said act may retain the watch
officers employed thereon, without regard to citizenship, for seven
years from this date, and such watch officers shall be eligible for
promotion. Any vacancy occurring among such watch officers within two
years from this date may be filled without regard to citizenship; but
any vacancy which may occur thereafter shall be filled by a watch
officer who is a citizen of the United States. * * * (Executive order,
Sept. 4, 1914.)


Watch officers who are not citizens.

Executive order of Sept. 1, 1916:

 1. The provisions of the law prescribing that the watch officers of
 vessels of the United States registered for foreign trade shall be
 citizens of the United States, are hereby suspended so far and for such
 length of time as is herein provided, namely: All watch officers now
 employed on foreign-built ships which have been admitted to United
 States registry under said Act who, heretofore, have declared their
 intention to become citizens of the United States and watch officers on
 such ships who, within six months from this date, shall declare their
 intention to become such citizens shall be entitled to serve on
 foreign-built ships so registered until the time shall have expired
 within which they may become such citizens under their declarations,
 and shall be eligible for promotion upon any foreign-built ship so
 registered.


Duration of licenses.

All licenses issued to such officers shall be for a term of five years,
but the holder of a license may have the same renewed for another five
years in the manner prescribed in the rules and regulations of the Board
of Supervising Inspectors: _Provided, however_, That any officer holding
a license, and who is engaged in a service which necessitates his
continuous absence from the United States, may make application in
writing for renewal and transmit the same to the board of local
inspectors, with his certificate of citizenship, if naturalized, and a
statement of the applicant, verified before a consul or other officer of
the United States authorized to administer an oath, setting forth the
reasons for not appearing in person; and upon receiving the same the
board of local inspectors that originally issued such license shall
renew the same and shall notify the applicant of such renewal: _Provided
further_, That no license as master, mate, or pilot of any class of
vessel shall be renewed without furnishing a satisfactory certificate of
examination as to color blindness. And in all cases where the issue is
the suspension or revocation of such licenses, whether before the local
boards of inspectors (of steam vessels), as provided for in section
forty-four hundred and fifty of the Revised Statutes, or before the
supervising inspectors, as provided for in section forty-four hundred
and fifty-two of the Revised Statutes, the accused shall be allowed to
appear by counsel and to testify in his own behalf. (May 28, 1896; sec.
2; Oct. 22, 1914.)


Service during war.

No master, mate, pilot, or engineer of steam vessels licensed under
title fifty-two [R. S., 4399-4500] of the Revised Statutes shall be
liable to draft in time of war, except for the performance of duties
such as required by his license; and, while performing such duties in
the service of the United States, every such master, mate, pilot, or
engineer shall be entitled to the highest rate of wages paid in the
merchant marine of the United States for similar services; and, if
killed or wounded while performing such duties under the United States,
they, or their heirs, or their legal representatives shall be entitled
to all the privileges accorded to soldiers and sailors serving in the
Army and Navy, under the pension laws of the United States. (May 28,
1896; sec. 2.)


Officer's license.

The boards of local inspectors shall license and classify the masters,
chief mates, and second and third mates, if in charge of a watch,
engineers, and pilots of all steam vessels, and the masters of sail
vessels of over seven hundred gross tons, and all other vessels of over
one hundred gross tons carrying passengers for hire. It shall be
unlawful to employ any person, or for any person to serve, as a master,
chief mate, engineer, or pilot of any steamer or as master of any sail
vessel of over seven hundred gross tons, or of any other vessel of over
one hundred gross tons carrying passengers for hire, who is not licensed
by the inspectors; and anyone violating this section shall be liable to
a penalty of one hundred dollars for each offense. [See act June 9,
1910, p. 351.] (R. S., 4438; Dec. 21, 1898; Jan. 25, 1907; May 28, 1908;
sec. 2.)

Every master, mate, engineer, and pilot who shall receive a license
shall, when employed upon any vessel, within forty-eight hours after
going on duty, place his certificate of license, which shall be framed
under glass, in some conspicuous place in such vessel, where it can be
seen by passengers and others at all times: _Provided_, That in case of
emergency such officer may be transferred to another vessel of the same
owners for a period not exceeding forty-eight hours without the transfer
of his license to such other vessel; and for every neglect to comply
with this provision by any such master, mate, engineer, or pilot, he
shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars, or to the revocation
of his license. [See act June 9, 1910, p. 351.] (R. S., 4446; Feb. 19,
1907.)


Master's license.

Whenever any person applies to be licensed as master of any steam
vessel, or of a sail vessel of over seven hundred tons, the inspectors
shall make diligent inquiry as to his character, and shall carefully
examine the applicant as well as the proofs which he presents in support
of his claim, and if they are satisfied that his capacity, experience,
habits of life, and character are such as warrant the belief that he can
safely be intrusted with the duties and responsibilities of the station
for which he makes application, they shall grant him a license
authorizing him to discharge such duties on any such vessel for the term
of five years; but such license shall be suspended or revoked upon
satisfactory proof of bad conduct, intemperate habits, incapacity,
inattention to his duties, or the willful violation of any provision of
this title [R. S., 4399-4500] applicable to him. [See act June 9, 1910,
p. 351.] (R. S., 4439; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 2.)


Mate's license.

Whenever any person applies for authority to be employed as chief mate
of ocean or coastwise steam vessels or of sail vessels of over seven
hundred tons, or as second or third mate of ocean or coastwise steam
vessels, who shall have charge of a watch, or whenever any person
applies for authority to be employed as mate of river steamers, the
inspectors shall require satisfactory evidence of the knowledge,
experience, and skill of the applicant in lading cargo and in handling
and stowage of freight, and if for license as chief mate on ocean or
coastwise steamers, or of sail vessels of over seven hundred tons, or as
second or third mate of ocean or coastwise steamers, who shall have
charge of a watch, shall also examine him as to his knowledge and
ability in navigation and managing such vessels and all other duties
pertaining to his station, and if satisfied of his qualifications and
good character they shall grant him a license authorizing him to perform
such duties for the term of five years upon the waters upon which he is
found qualified to act; but such license shall be suspended or revoked
upon satisfactory proof of bad conduct, intemperate habits,
unskillfulness, or want of knowledge of the duties of his station or the
willful violation of any provision of this title [R. S., 4399-4500].
[See act June 9,1910, p. 351.] (R. S., 444c; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 3.)


Engineer's license.

Whenever any person applies for authority to perform the duties of
engineer of any steam-vessel, the inspectors shall examine the applicant
as to his knowledge of steam-machinery, and his experience as an
engineer, and also the proofs which he produces in support of his claim;
and if, upon full consideration, they are satisfied that his character,
habits of life, knowledge, and experience in the duties of an engineer
are all such as to authorize the belief that he is a suitable and safe
person to be intrusted with the powers and duties of such a station,
they shall grant him a license, authorizing him to be employed in such
duties for the term of five years, in which they shall assign him to the
appropriate class of engineers; but such license shall be suspended or
revoked upon satisfactory proof of negligence, unskillfulness,
intemperance, or the willful violation of any provision of this Title
[R. S., 4399-4500]. Whenever complaint is made against any engineer
holding a license authorizing him to take charge of the boilers and
machinery of any steamer, that he has, through negligence or want of
skill, permitted the boilers in his charge to burn or otherwise become
in bad condition, or that he has not kept his engine and machinery in
good working order, it shall be the duty of the inspectors, upon
satisfactory proof of such negligence or want of skill, to revoke the
license of such engineer and assign him to a lower grade or class of
engineers, if they find him fitted therefor. [See act June 9, 1910, p.
351.] (R. S., 4441; May 28, 1896.)


Pilot's license.

Whenever any person claiming to be a skillful pilot of steam-vessels
offers himself for a license, the inspectors shall make diligent inquiry
as to his character and merits, and if satisfied, from personal
examination of the applicant, with the proof that he offers that he
possesses the requisite knowledge and skill, and is trustworthy and
faithful, they shall grant him a license for the term of five years to
pilot any such vessel within the limits prescribed in the license; but
such license shall be suspended or revoked upon satisfactory evidence of
negligence, unskillfulness, inattention to the duties of his station, or
intemperance, or the willful violation of any provision of this title
[R. S., 4399-4500]. [See act June 9, 1910, p. 351.] (R. S., 4442; May
28, 1896.)


Master or mate acting as pilot.

Where the master or mate is also pilot of the vessel, he shall not be
required to hold two licenses to perform such duties, but the license
issued shall state on its face that he is authorized to act in such
double capacity. [See act June 9, p. 351.] (R. S., 4443.)


Oath of officer.

Every master, chief mate, engineer, and pilot, who receives a license,
shall, before entering upon his duties, make oath before one of the
inspectors herein provided for, to be recorded with the certificate,
that he will faithfully and honestly, according to his best skill and
judgment, without concealment or reservation, perform all the duties
required of him by law. (R. S., 4445.)

Every applicant for license as either master, mate, pilot, or engineer
under the provisions of this title [R. S., 4399-4500] shall make and
subscribe to an oath of affirmation, before one of the inspectors
referred to in this title, to the truth of all the statements set forth
in his application for such license.

Any person who shall make or subscribe to any oath or affirmation
authorized in this title and knowing the same to be false shall be
deemed guilty of perjury.

Every licensed master, mate, pilot, or engineer who shall change, by
addition, interpolation, or erasure of any kind, any certificate or
license issued by any inspector or inspectors referred to in this title
shall, for every such offense, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment at hard labor for
a term not exceeding three years. (Mar. 23, 1900.)


Removal of master.

Any person or body corporate having more than one-half ownership of any
vessel shall have the power to remove a master, who is also part owner
of such vessel, as such majority owners have to remove a master not an
owner. This section shall not apply where there is a valid written
agreement subsisting, by virtue of which such master would be entitled
to possession, nor in any case where a master has possession as part
owner, obtained before the ninth day of April, eighteen hundred and
seventy-two. (R. S., 4250.)




CHAPTER XVI

THE EXAMINATION FOR LICENSES—MASTER AND MATES


Original Licenses.

Before an original license is issued to any person to act as a master,
mate, pilot, or engineer he shall personally appear before some local
board or a supervising inspector for examination. Any person who has
attained the age of 19 years and has had the necessary experience shall
be eligible for examination: _Provided_, That no person shall receive a
license as master or chief engineer before reaching the age of 21 years.

Inspectors shall, before granting an original license to any person to
act as an officer of a vessel, require the applicant to make written
application upon the blank form furnished by the Department of Commerce,
to be filed in the inspectors' office. When practicable, applicants for
master's, mate's, pilot's, or engineer's license shall present to the
inspectors, to be filed with their application, discharges or letters
from the master or other officer under whom they have served, certifying
to the name of the vessel and in what capacity the applicant has served
under him; also period of such service. Inspectors shall also, when
practicable, require applicant for pilot's license to have the written
indorsement of the master and engineer of the vessel upon which he has
served, and of one licensed pilot, as to his qualifications. In the case
of applicants for original engineer's license, they shall also, when
practicable, have the indorsement of the master and engineer of a vessel
on which they have served, together with one other licensed engineer.

The first license issued to any person by a United States inspector
shall be considered an original license, where the United States records
show no previous issue to such applicant.

No original license shall be issued to any naturalized citizen on less
experience in any grade than would have been required of a citizen of
the United States by birth. (R. S., 4405.)

The requirements for a license have been greatly modified, and the
following circular letter sets forth the minimum technical knowledge
necessary to pass the examiners:

 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
 STEAMBOAT INSPECTION SERVICE
 WASHINGTON

June 13, 1917.

U. S. Supervising and Local Inspectors, Steamboat-Inspection Service.

Under the provisions of Section 4405, Revised Statutes of the United
States, as amended by the act of Congress approved February 8, 1907, the
executive committee of the Board of Supervising Inspectors,
Steamboat-Inspection Service, at a called meeting held in Washington, D.
C., from June 4 to 12, inclusive, 1917, adopted the following
resolutions:

These amendments of the rules, having received the approval of the
Secretary of Commerce on June 12, 1917, have now the force of law, and
must be observed accordingly.


Renewal of licenses.

_Resolved_, That section 8, Rule V, General Rules and Regulations, all
classes, be struck out and the following substituted therefor:

8.  Whenever an officer shall apply for a renewal of his license for the
same grade, the presentation of the old license with oath of officer
shall be considered sufficient evidence of his title to renewal, which
old license and oath of office shall be retained by the inspectors upon
their official files as the evidence upon which the license was renewed.

Whenever a licensed officer makes application for a renewal of his
license, he shall appear in person before some board of local inspectors
or supervising inspector, except that upon renewal of such license for
the same grade, when the distance from any local board or supervising
inspector is such as to put the person holding the same to great
inconvenience and expense to appear in person, he may, upon taking oath
of office before any person authorized to administer oaths, and
forwarding the same, together with the license to be renewed, to the
local board or supervising inspector of the district in which he resides
or is employed, have the same renewed by the said inspectors, if no
valid reason to the contrary be known to them; and they shall attach
such oath to the stub end of the license, which is to be retained on
file in their office: _Provided, however_, That any officer holding a
license, and who is engaged in a service which necessitates his
continuous absence from the United States, may make application in
writing for renewal and transmit the same to the board of local
inspectors, with its certificate of citizenship, if naturalized, and a
statement of the applicant, verified before a consul or other officer of
the United States authorized to administer an oath, setting forth the
reasons for not appearing in person; and upon receiving the same the
board of local inspectors that originally issued such license shall
renew the same and shall notify the applicant of such renewal, and no
license as master, mate, or pilot of any class of vessel shall be
renewed without a certificate that the color sense of the applicant is
normal. (R. S., 4405, 4438.)


Amendments of general rules and regulations, ocean and coastwise.

_Resolved_: That sections 20 to 30, both inclusive, Rule V, General
Rules and Regulations, Ocean and Coastwise, be struck out and the
following substituted therefor:


Substituting service in next lower grade for raise of grade.

20. Except as hereinafter provided, an applicant who has served in a
lower grade than that for which he is licensed may substitute service in
the grade next below that for which he is licensed, which service shall
count one-half in computing experience for raise of grade. For example,
if an applicant holds chief mate's license and has served nine months as
chief mate and six months as second mate, the six months' service as
second mate shall count as three months as chief mate in computing
experience.


Master of ocean steam vessels.

21. An applicant for license as master of ocean steam vessels shall be
eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory documentary
evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the following
experience:

 _First._ One year's service as chief mate of ocean steam vessels, or

 _Second._ Two years' service as second mate of ocean steam vessels, one
 year of such service while holding a license as chief mate of ocean
 steam vessels, or

 _Third._ Two years' service as watch officer actually in charge of a
 bridge watch on ocean steam vessels, while holding a license as chief
 mate of ocean steam vessels, or

 _Fourth._ Five years' service as third mate of ocean steam vessels, two
 years of such service while holding a license as chief mate of ocean
 steam vessels, or

 _Fifth._ Five years' service on ocean sail vessels of 300 gross tons or
 over, two years of such service while holding a license as master of
 sail vessels, or

 _Sixth._ One year's service as master or chief mate of coastwise steam
 vessels.


Examination for master of ocean steam vessels.

22. An applicant for license as master of ocean steam vessels shall pass
a satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Latitude by meridian altitude of the sun.
  2. Latitude by ex-meridian altitude of the sun.
  3. Latitude by meridian altitude of a star.
  4. Latitude by pole star.
  5. Longitude by chronometer (A.M. and P.M.).
  6. Position by Sumner's method.
  7. Day's work.
  8. Mercator's sailing.
  9. Deviation of the compass by an amplitude.
 10. Deviation of the compass by an azimuth.
 11. Time of high water at a given port.
 12. Chart navigation.
 13. Storm signals.
 14. International code of signals.
 15. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
 16. Use of gun and rocket apparatus for saving life from shipwreck,
     as practiced by the United States Coast Guard.
 17. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.


Masters of coastwise steam vessels.

23. An applicant for license as master of coastwise steam vessels shall
be eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory
documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the
following experience:

 _First._ One year's service as chief mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, or

 _Second._ Two years' service as second mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, one year of such service while holding a license as chief mate
 of ocean or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Third._ Five years' service as third mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, two years of such service while holding a license as chief
 mate of ocean or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Fourth._ One year's service as master of lake, bay, or sound steam
 vessels and in addition thereto one year's service as second mate,
 third mate, quartermaster or wheelsman on ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels while holding a license as master of lake, bay, or sound steam
 vessels, or

 _Fifth._ Five years' service on ocean or coastwise sail vessels of 300
 gross tons or over, two years of which service shall have been as
 master, or

 _Sixth._ One year's service as a licensed master of ocean or coastwise
 sail vessels of 700 gross tons or over, or

 _Seventh._ Two years' service as master of lake, bay, or sound towing
 steam vessels for license as master of coastwise towing steam vessels
 of 300 gross tons or under.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as master of
coastwise steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of this
section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair and
reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.


Examination for master of coastwise steam vessels.

24. An applicant for license as master of coastwise steam vessels on
routes exceeding 300 miles shall pass a satisfactory examination as to
his knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Latitude by meridian altitude of the sun.
  2. Latitude by pole star.
  3. Day's work.
  4. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  5. Chart navigation.
  6. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
  7. Storm signals.
  8. Use of gun and rocket apparatus for saving life from shipwreck,
     as practiced by the United States Coast Guard.
  9. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.

An applicant for license as master of coastwise steam vessels on route
not exceeding 300 miles shall pass a satisfactory examination as to his
knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Chart navigation.
  2. Aids to navigation on route.
  3. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  4. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
  5. Storm signals.
  6. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require


Masters of sail vessels.

25. An applicant for license as master of sail vessels of over 700 gross
tons shall be eligible for examination after he has furnished
satisfactory documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has
had the following experience:

 _First._ Five years' service in the deck department of sail vessels of
 200 gross tons or over, one year of such service shall have been as
 master of sail vessels of 500 gross tons or over, or

 _Second._ Two years' service as master of sail vessels of 200 gross
 tons or over, or

 _Third._ Two years' service as mate of sail vessels of 500 gross tons
 or over, or

 _Fourth._ Two years' service as master of auxiliary sail vessels of 100
 gross tons or over.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as master of
sail vessels does not meet the specific requirements of this section,
other service which the local inspectors consider a fair and reasonable
equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service herein
specified.


Examination for license as master of sail vessels.

26. An applicant for license as master of sail vessels shall pass a
satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Latitude by meridian altitude of the sun.
  2. Latitude by pole star.
  3. Longitude by chronometer (A.M. and P.M.).
  4. Day's work.
  5. Mercator's sailing.
  6. Deviation of the compass by an amplitude.
  7. Deviation of the compass by an azimuth.
  8. Chart navigation.
  9. International code of signals.
 10. Storm signals.
 11. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
 12. Use of gun and rocket apparatus for saving life from shipwreck,
     as practiced by the U. S. Coast Guard.
 13. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.


Chief mate of ocean steam vessels.

27. An applicant for license as chief mate of ocean steam vessels
shall be eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory
documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the
following experience:

 _First._ One year's service as a licensed second mate of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Second._ Two years' service as watch officer on ocean or coastwise
 steam vessels, while holding license as second mate of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Third._ Two years' service as third mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, one year of such service while holding a license as second
 mate of ocean or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Fourth._ Two years' service as master of lake, bay, or sound steam
 vessels of 1,000 gross tons or over, or

 _Fifth._ Five years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels of 200 gross tons or over, two years of which
 service as chief mate of such ocean or coastwise sail vessels, or

 _Sixth._ Two years' service in the deck department of steam vessels
 engaged in the ocean or coastwise fisheries, one year of such service
 to have been as master of such vessels, or

 _Seventh._ Five years' service in the deck department of sail vessels
 engaged in the ocean or coastwise fisheries, two years of such service
 to have been as master of such vessels.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as chief mate
of ocean steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of this
section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair and
reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.


Second mate of ocean steam vessels.

28. An applicant for license as second mate of ocean steam vessels shall
be eligible for examination after he shall have furnished satisfactory
documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the
following experience:

 _First._ One year's service as third mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, or

 _Second._ Three years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, one year of such service shall have been as
 watch officer or quartermaster on such vessels, or

 _Third._ A graduate from the seamanship class of a nautical school ship
 together with three months' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Fourth._ Three years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels of 200 gross tons or over, one year of such
 service shall have been as second mate of such vessels, or

 _Fifth._ One year's service as quartermaster of ocean or coastwise
 steam vessels while holding a license as third mate of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Sixth._ Three years' service as a seaman in the deck department of
 ocean or coastwise sail vessels together with one year's service in the
 deck department of ocean or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Seventh._ Five years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels of 100 gross tons or over. Service on sail
 vessels engaged in the ocean or coastwise fisheries shall be accepted
 as meeting the requirements of this paragraph, or

 _Eighth._ One year's service as first-class pilot of lake, bay, or
 sound steam vessels of 500 gross tons or over, together with three
 months' service in the deck department of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, or

 _Ninth._ One year's service as master of lake, bay, or sound steam
 vessels of 500 gross tons or over

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as second mate
of ocean steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of this
section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair and
reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.

Examination for license as chief mate and second mate of ocean steam
vessels.

29. An applicant for license as chief mate or second mate of ocean steam
vessels shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his
knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Latitude by meridian altitude of the sun.
  2. Latitude by meridian altitude of a star.
  3. Longitude by chronometer (A.M. and P.M.).
  4. Deviation of the compass by an amplitude.
  5. Deviation of the compass by an azimuth.
  6. Day's work.
  7. Mercator's sailing.
  8. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  9. Chart navigation.
 10. Storm signals.
 11. International code of signals.
 12. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
 13. Stowage of cargo.
 14. Use of gun and rocket apparatus for saving life from shipwreck,
     as practiced by the United States Coast Guard.
 15. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.


Third mate of ocean steam vessels.

30. An applicant for license as third mate of ocean steam vessels
shall be eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory
documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the
following experience:

 _First._ Two years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Second._ Three years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels, or

 _Third._ A graduate from the seamanship class of a nautical school
 ship, or

 _Fourth._ One year's service as master or pilot of lake, bay, or sound
 steamers.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as third mate
of ocean steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of this
section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair and
reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.


Examination for license as third mate of ocean steam vessels.

31. An applicant for license as third mate of ocean steam vessels shall
be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of
the following subjects:

  1. Latitude by meridian altitude of the sun.
  2. Day's work.
  3. Mercator's sailing.
  4. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  5. Chart navigation.
  6. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
  7. Stowage of cargo.
  8. Storm signals.
  9. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.


Chief mate of coastwise steam vessels.

32. An applicant for chief mate of coastwise steam vessels shall be
eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory documentary
evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the following
experience:

 _First._ One year's service as second mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, or

 _Second._ One year's service as first-class pilot of lake, bay, sound
 steam vessels, together with one year's service as quartermaster or
 wheelsman on ocean or coastwise steam vessels while holding a license
 as first-class pilot of lake, bay, or sound steam vessels, or

 _Third._ Two years' service as third mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, or

 _Fourth._ Two years' service in the deck department of steam vessels
 engaged in the ocean or coastwise fisheries, one year of such service
 to have been as master of such vessels, or

 _Fifth._ Five years' service in the deck department of sail vessels
 engaged in the ocean or coastwise fisheries, two years' of such service
 to have been as master of such vessels, or

 _Sixth._ Two years' service as master of ocean or coastwise sail
 vessels of 200 gross tons or over, or

 _Seventh._ Three years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels for license as chief mate of coastwise steam
 vessels of 500 gross tons or under, or

 _Eighth._ Two years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels together with one year's service in the deck
 department of ocean or coastwise steam vessels for license as chief
 mate of coastwise steam vessels of 500 gross tons or under, or

 _Ninth._ One year's service as master or two years' service as
 first-class pilot of lake, bay, or sound towing steam vessels for
 license as chief mate of coastwise towing steam vessels of 300 gross
 tons or under.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as chief mate
of coastwise steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of
this section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair
and reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.


Second mate of coastwise steam vessels.

33. An applicant for license as second mate of coastwise steam vessels
shall be eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory
documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the
following experience:

 _First._ One year's service as third mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels, or

 _Second._ One year's service as quartermaster or wheelsman on ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels while holding a license as third mate of ocean
 or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Third._ Three years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Fourth._ Two years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels together with one year's service in the deck
 department of ocean or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Fifth._ A graduate from the seamanship class of a nautical school ship
 together with three months' service in the deck department of an ocean
 or coastwise steam vessel, or

 _Sixth._ One year's service as a licensed master of lake, bay, or sound
 steam vessels, or

 _Seventh._ Two years' service as first-class pilot of lake, bay, or
 sound steam vessels, or

 _Eighth._ One year's service as first-class pilot of lake, bay, or
 sound steam vessels, together with three months' service in the deck
 department of ocean or coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Ninth._ One year's service as chief mate of ocean or coastwise steam
 vessels engaged in the fisheries, or

 _Tenth._ One year's service as master of ocean or coastwise sail
 vessels engaged in the fisheries.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as second mate
of coastwise steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of
this section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair
and reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.

Third mate of coastwise steam vessels.

34. An applicant for license as third mate of coastwise steam vessels
shall be eligible for examination after he has furnished satisfactory
documentary evidence to the local inspectors that he has had the
following experience:

 _First._ Two years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise steam vessels, or

 _Second._ Three years' service in the deck department of ocean or
 coastwise sail vessels, or

 _Third._ A graduate from the seamanship class of a nautical school
 ship, or

 _Fourth._ One year's service as master or first-class pilot of lake,
 bay, or sound steam vessels.

In cases where the experience of an applicant for license as third mate
of coastwise steam vessels does not meet the specific requirements of
this section, other service which the local inspectors consider a fair
and reasonable equivalent may be accepted by them in lieu of the service
herein specified.


Examination for license as chief mate and second mate of coastwise
steam vessels.

35. An applicant for license as chief mate or second mate of coastwise
steam vessels on routes exceeding 600 miles shall be required to pass a
satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Latitude by meridian altitude of the sun.
  2. Day's work.
  3. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  4. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
  5. Chart navigation.
  6. Stowage of cargo.
  7. Storm signals.
  8. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.

An applicant for license as chief mate or second mate of coastwise steam
vessels on routes of 600 miles or less shall be required to pass a
satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the following subjects:

  1. Chart navigation.
  2. Aids to navigation on route.
  3. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  4. Marking of lead line.
  5. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
  6. Storm signals.
  7. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.


Examination for license as third mate of coastwise steam vessels.

36. An applicant for license as third mate of coastwise steam vessels
shall pass a satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the
following subjects:

  1. Chart navigation.
  2. Determination of distance from a fixed object.
  3. International rules for preventing collisions at sea.
  4. Marking lead line.
  5. Storm signals.
  6. Such further examination of a non-mathematical character as the
     local inspectors may require.


Indorsement of Inland Licenses for Ocean Service.

_Resolved_, That whenever it may appear to the satisfaction of the
Supervising Inspector General, that the demand for licensed officers for
ocean and coastwise vessels of the American merchant marine is such that
it cannot be met under existing requirements and regulations he may
authorize local inspectors to indorse the license of officers of lake,
bay, and sound steam vessels for ocean or coastwise service for a period
not to exceed six months or until such officer shall have passed a
satisfactory examination for ocean or coastwise service within this
period.

Officers whose licenses have been so indorsed shall present themselves
for examination at the earliest possible opportunity after said
indorsement.


Amendments of General Rules and Regulations for Bays, Sounds, and Lakes
Other than the Great Lakes.

Experience Qualifications of Officers Eliminated.

_Resolved_, That for the present and until further notice, sections
20, 21, 23, 26, 31 and 32 of Rule V, General Rules and Regulations
applying to Lakes (other than the Great Lakes), Bays, and Sounds,
be struck out, and local inspectors notified that hereafter in issuing
licenses to officers of vessels within this classification they may
exercise the judgment and discretion vested in them by the law,
without regard to the experience required by the rules and regulations
the sufficiency of such experience to be determined by the local
inspectors when the candidate applies for examination.




CHAPTER XVII

THE WATCH OFFICER


The Officer of the Watch or the Watch Officer, as he is usually termed
in the Merchant Service, is the deck officer who has charge of the
vessel while under way at sea. On other occasions, if stopped through
trouble, or because of communication with other vessels, or on occasions
requiring special maneuvering, as in coming in and out of port, rescues
at sea, etc., the Master assumes full charge.

+The Watch Officers.+ The watch officers are usually the Chief, Second
and Third Mates, on vessels of moderate tonnage. In larger craft
different watches are arranged. Then the Chief Mate may stand no regular
bridge watch, and the Second, Third, and Fourth Mates take this duty.

In some liners it is the custom to style the watch officers, all
"second" officers; namely Senior, Junior, and Extra, Second Officers.
These are usually all master mariners. Junior officers of the watch are
also on the bridge, attend to the conning of the course, the working of
navigation and bearings, and the keeping of the bridge log, which is
signed by the senior watch officer at the end of the watch.

+Importance of Watch Duty.+ For a long time a slipshod method of keeping
watch prevailed in certain steamers, the outgrowth of second-rate
sailing-ship practice, where thrifty, but ill-informed, masters,
insisted on their watch officers keeping "busy" during the day.

It was thought advisable by these gentlemen to have the officer on the
bridge "with nothing to do" attend to a bit of sewing on canvas, or help
out with the painting, and what not. Of course such masters were doomed
to the scrap heap where they belong. A few miles added to the coal bill,
through slovenly daytime steering, with kinks in the course as well as
in the seams sewed by the misused officer, soon brought about reform.
Added to this a certain danger, such as running down submerged hulls,
and the like—with the thing happening once or twice, helped to wake up
owners. Also, the bumping of two of these "economical" (and lubberly)
craft, may have helped too.


FROM NAVIGATION LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES

The board of local inspectors shall make an entry in the certificate of
inspection of every ocean and coastwise seagoing merchant vessel of the
United States propelled by machinery, and every ocean-going vessel
carrying passengers, the minimum number of licensed deck officers
required for her safe navigation according to the following scale:

That no such vessel shall be navigated unless she shall have on board
and in her service one duly licensed master. (Mar. 3, 1913; sec. 2.)

Three watches.

That every such vessel of one thousand gross tons and over, propelled by
machinery, shall have in her service and on board three licensed mates,
who shall stand in three watches while such vessel is being navigated,
unless such vessel is engaged in a run of less than four hundred miles
from the port of departure to the port of final destination, then such
vessel shall have two licensed mates; and every vessel of two hundred
gross tons and less than one thousand gross tons, propelled by
machinery, shall have two licensed mates.

That every such vessel of one hundred gross tons and under two hundred
gross tons, propelled by machinery, shall have on board and in her
service one licensed mate; but if such vessel is engaged in a trade in
which the time required to make the passage from the port of departure
to the port of destination exceeds twenty-four hours, then such vessel
shall have two licensed mates.

That nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prevent local
inspectors from increasing the number of licensed officers on any vessel
subject to the inspection laws of the United States if, in their
judgment, such vessel is not sufficiently manned for her safe
navigation: _Provided_, That this section shall not apply to fishing or
whaling vessels, yachts, or motor boats as defined in the Act of June
ninth, nineteen hundred and ten.

Rest before going on watch.

It shall be unlawful for the master, owner, agent, or other person
having authority, to permit an officer of any vessel to take charge of
the deck watch of the vessel upon leaving or immediately after leaving
port, unless such officer shall have had at least six hours off duty
within the twelve hours immediately preceding the time of sailing, and
no licensed officer on any ocean or coastwise vessel shall be required
to do duty to exceed nine hours of any twenty-four while in port,
including the date of arrival, or more than twelve hours of any
twenty-four at sea, except in a case of emergency when life or property
is endangered. Any violation of this section shall subject the person or
persons guilty thereof to a penalty of one hundred dollars. (Sec. 3.)

+Master Liable.+ The improper keeping of watch comes clearly under the
head of negligence, or even misconduct, and the law governing this is of
importance. The penalty, when death results from such negligence,
misconduct, etc. is TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS FINE or IMPRISONMENT FOR TEN
YEARS, +OR BOTH+.

The law is given below:

Death from negligence, misconduct, etc.

Every captain, engineer, pilot, or other person employed on any
steamboat or vessel, by whose misconduct, negligence, or inattention to
his duties on such vessel the life of any person is destroyed, and every
owner, charterer, inspector, or other public officer, through whose
fraud, neglect, connivance, misconduct, or violation of law the life of
any person is destroyed, shall be fined not more than ten thousand
dollars, or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both: _Provided_,
That when the owner or charterer of any steamboat or vessel shall be a
corporation, any executive officer of such corporation, for the time
being actually charged with the control and management of the operation,
equipment, or navigation of such steamboat or vessel, who has knowingly
and willfully caused or allowed such fraud, neglect, connivance,
misconduct, or violation of law, by which the life of any person is
destroyed, shall be fined not more than ten thousand dollars, or
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both. (Sec. 282; Repeals R. S.,
5344, and act Mar. 3, 1905, sec. 5.)

Watch officers should also heed another matter, a section of Rule V, of
the Board of Supervising Inspectors, this rule is also given:

Only certain persons allowed in pilot house and on navigator's bridge.

17. Masters and pilots of steamers carrying passengers shall exclude
from the pilot houses and navigator's bridge of such steamers, while
under way, all persons not connected with the navigation of such
steamers, except officers of the Steamboat-Inspection Service, Coast
Guard, and engineer officers of the United States Army in charge of the
improvement of that particular waterway, when upon business: _Provided_,
That licensed officers of steamboats, persons regularly engaged in
learning the profession of pilot, officers of the United States Navy,
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Lighthouse Service,
assistant engineers of the Engineer Department of the United States Army
connected with the improvement of that particular waterway, and the
engineer officers connected with the construction and operation of the
Panama Canal may be allowed in the pilot house or upon the navigator's
bridge upon the responsibility of the officer in charge.

The master of every such passenger and ferry steamer shall keep three
printed copies of this section of Rule V posted in conspicuous places on
such steamer, one of which shall be kept posted in the pilot house.

Such printed copies shall be furnished by the Department of Commerce to
local inspectors for distribution. (Sec. 4405, R. S.)


+Relieving the Watch.+ On well-conducted vessels no part of the routine
is so important, and so necessary of clear-cut understanding, as the
matter of turning over the watch.

On a steamer in which the writer had the good fortune to serve—a liner
in the Transatlantic service—this formality was practiced with the
utmost precision.

The officer in charge of the watch would keep facing ahead, near the
telegraph, if the weather was thick. He would turn over the data of the
watch rapidly and clearly; the relieving officer having already read
over and initialed the Captain's order book.

 Special orders from the Captain.
 Position—how obtained—when.
 Vessels passed; in last hour, at least.
 Weather—fog if any; sea rising or falling.
 Wind, veering, or hauling.
 Distance made—by log—revolutions.
 Soundings taken—if any.
 Lights sighted, or expected; if in pilot waters.
 How vessel was steering—wild—good—etc.

+THEN—being ready to turn over the watch:+

"The course is N. 76 degrees east," says the Officer of the Watch.

"N. 76 degrees, east," is the reply, and the moment these words are
spoken the relief is in charge, and steps next to the telegraph.

+An Incident at Eight Bells.+ This simple ceremony of turning the watch
over took place one morning at eight bells—it was a smoky channel
morning, heavy weather had been met with on the run eastward, and the
train for London was waiting at Southampton, for the first-class
passengers who expected to dine at the metropolis that night. It was
foggy, and the vessel was doing close to twenty knots; the telegraphs at
"stand by." Everything had been passed over to the relief. The
quartermasters and juniors had relieved each other, two watches were on
the bridge at once, in the cold wet mist. One crowd, still a trifle
sleepy, but filled with a sea breakfast, the other tired and wet.

Just as the course was being given, and half completed, something leapt
out of the gray fog:

Three "toots"[1] on the horn in the crow's nest, sounded and a
four-masted sailer shot up, as if a picture thrown on the screen of fog
ahead.

"+Hard Starb'd!+" the order snapped out on the tail of the words of the
course. The wet and draggled officer of the watch had not yet received
his reply—+he was still in charge+.

His order came with the harsh jangle of the telegraph—he was stopping
the port engine—and we swept past an iron four-masted ship, her crew
clambering to the bulwarks, her sails slatting in the breeze, as we got
the first sound of her horn.

The above is an instance where something happened at a critical moment.
But both officers were trained men, and the man in charge knew he was
still responsible, and acted without a second of delay.

+Responsibility.+ Few men, aside from those who serve as officers at
sea, have the responsibility of life and property so directly under them
as the officers of the watch.

The young man who takes his first watch as officer in charge—with the
great vessel—her lives—and cargo, all obedient to his order and
dependent upon his skill and quickness in the sudden emergency that may
spring up at any moment; that youngster is to be congratulated. Few men
are given the direct handling and responsibility for such mighty forces.

He, in most cases, realizes this. Accidents are usually the outgrowth of
carelessness, resulting from long watches at sea +where nothing ever
happens+.

It is necessary that the officer of the watch constantly keep his edge.
The old-fashioned system of "watch and watch," that man- and
soul-killing drill of an age of short-sighted "economy," has come to be
frowned upon by those who have had to pay the bills resulting from
accident and loss.

The Officer of the watch should come to the bridge fresh and in full
vigor. His senses of sight and hearing should be acute; he should be
completely awake during the whole four hours of his duty.

He should constantly keep in mind what he must do under certain
emergencies.

He should constantly be rehearsing disaster—with foresight as his mentor.

He must have ingrained in his being the instinctive knowledge of PORT
and STARBOARD, and what they mean. Not as +words, but as effects+.

He should be a part of the ship. The direction of her head, or the
action of her engines, should be as natural to him as any movement of
his own body.

This habit of mind enables an officer to act as quick as he can think—to
do the right thing without an instant of hesitation.

+Rules of the Road.+ The rules of the road should also be a part of his
unconscious knowledge—particularly those rules relating to the
prevention of collision at sea.

Many watch officers—familiar with the rules of the Road on the high
seas, are lamentably lax when conning their vessel through narrow
waters; here is where a great percentage of the accidents to vessels
occur. Know the inland rules, the whistle signals; the proper side of
the fairways to take; the buoys and marks.

+What to Look Out for.+ The officer of the watch should keep his eyes
pretty close to the water ahead; even in the sleepy times of peace. Look
for patches of weed; and avoid them. Look for submerged wreckage;
floating mines—for many years after the war—well whitened with bird
droppings, and almost invisible in the wake of the sun.

And at the present time no merchantman needs to be warned to look out
for periscopes, or what to do when he sees one—and remember they are
camouflaged too. Do not be too quick to ram a periscope that is lying
still. It may be a mine.

+Vessels without Lights.+ Vessels in dangerous waters now run without
the usual lights—in fact with no lights at all. This brings us to the
question of redoubled vigilance of the keenest and most wide-awake type
of watch officer. As vessels become more valuable, and more
necessary—the necessity for the best kind of conning is self evident.
Yet, due to our unfortunate lack of sea interest it is now necessary, to
let down the bars and send back to the sea men who lack in the keenness
and training that the situation demands, men who are simply so because
of our faulty lack of foresight in the past.

+The running without lights is sanctioned by the governments at war, as
a necessary war measure and fog signals are omitted in war zones.+

+The Unwritten Rule.+ Watch officers have long considered an "unwritten
rule" that has no doubt been acted upon. Namely, if you see collision
coming, "hit the other fellow." This of course is to be taken for what
it is worth and should find no response in the mind of the young officer
who tramps the bridge on the night watch and works out the problems of
the sea.

The law is very concise about the "Risk of collision" and collision
comes without much warning. The one thing that is positive, is the duty
to stand by, and this is incumbent on both vessels.

+Risk of Collision Rule.+ Risk of collision can, when circumstances
permit, be ascertained by carefully watching the compass bearing of an
approaching vessel. If the bearing does not appreciably change, such
risk should be deemed to exist.

+Duty to Stay by.+ In every case of collision between two vessels it
shall be the duty of the master or person in charge of each vessel, if
and so far as he can do so without serious danger to his own vessel,
crew, and passengers (if any), to stay by the other vessel until he has
ascertained that she has no need of further assistance, and to render to
the other vessel, her master, crew, and passengers (if any), such
assistance as may be practicable and as may be necessary in order to
save them from any danger caused by the collision, and also to give to
the master or person in charge of the other vessel the name of his own
vessel and her port of registry, or the port or place to which she
belongs, and also the name of the ports and places from which and to
which she is bound.

If he fails so to do, and no reasonable cause for such failure is shown,
the collision shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be deemed
to have been caused by his wrongful act, neglect, or default.

Every master or person in charge of a United States vessel who fails,
without reasonable cause, to render such assistance or give such
information as aforesaid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand dollars, or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two years; and for the above sum the vessel
shall be liable and may be seized and proceeded against by process in
any district court of the United States by any person; one-half such sum
to be payable to the informer and the other half to the United States.

+Dangerous Conditions.+ Fog, mist, bright moonlight, coal black night,
with phosphorescent sea; all are dangerous conditions so far as
visibility is concerned. From three to five in the morning; at the tail
of the mid watch, and for the first hour of the morning watch, when
vitality is low, and the senses of man lag with the coming of the dawn;
then is the time that the officer of the watch should key himself to a
sense of complete responsibility—helped out by black coffee if it can be
had—and every steamer should provide this at the change of watch, and
oftener if need be.

+Look Out.+ Be alive to the changes of the weather. Steamship officers
are liable to lack in this respect. Watch the stars, if out. Note the
sudden snuffing out of stars near the horizon—watch out for fog banks
lying low ahead.

Look out for white water, squalls, get awnings in before they are blown
away—never leaving the bridge, of course, unless the Master relieves.

+Ice.+ If in the dangerous latitudes look out for ice. Note sudden
changes in the temperature of air and sea. The sea water should be taken
every hour at least. Ice gives no warning—sense it, and slow down before
it is too late. Remember the Titanic.

Watch the barometer changes—the clouds—the wind, and its changes,
whether veering, or hauling.

+Important.+ Know the sailing ship routes—study the pilot charts—and
always remember the possible speed and condition of sail, whether on the
wind, or free, of sailing vessels that are liable to be met with in your
vicinity.

+Night Orders.+ The night order book contains two sets of orders:

 THE STANDING ORDERS

 +A. Before taking charge make yourself thoroughly familiar with the
 position of the ship with reference to vessels in sight, any land or
 shoals or rocks that may be near; with the general condition of the
 weather, speed, revolutions, sail, if any is set, awnings, boats swung
 out, running lights, and the orders of the Captain for the night.+

 +B. Make no change in the course—unless instructed to do so by the
 night orders, without obtaining the permission of the Captain—unless it
 is necessary to avoid immediate danger. Then report promptly to the
 Captain—by messenger or telephone.+

 +C. Make no change in the speed, unless as directed by the night
 orders, or to avoid collision.+

 +D. Report promptly to the Captain all lights upon the shore;
 discolored water; unusual weather conditions; and report all vessels
 sighted and their nature, when this can be determined. (At night, it is
 not usual to report every steamer passed.)+

 +E. When in doubt about anything affecting the safety of the vessel,
 call the Captain at once.+

 +F. In the event of fire, or any kind of disturbance or accident, call
 the Captain at once, and report same.+

 +G. Man overboard; act at once, stop, reverse, release water lights and
 ring buoys, call away quarter boat, and call Captain.+

 +H. Keep lookouts posted after dark, or in fog. Comply with all the
 regulations for preventing collisions at sea. Call Captain if it gets
 thick; start fog signals at once.+

 +I. Report all unusual changes in sea or weather to the Captain. If
 engines stop, or slow down without orders from the bridge, call Captain
 at once.+

 +J. Take bearings on the course whenever suitable stars are available.
 Call Captain at any unusual change in deviation, or error.+

 +K. Get sights when favorable conditions present themselves. Report all
 fixes to the Captain, on Officers' Report Blanks, show bearings, and
 time (ship) and log readings.+

 +L. All officers must read and sign these STANDING ORDERS, and must
 read and sign the night order book at the beginning of their watch,
 before taking over the course.+

 THE NIGHT ORDERS

 The night orders are usually written up by the Master in the dog watch
 and are signed by the officer coming on for the first night watch,
 eight to midnight.

 They may be amended and added to at any time. If the Master adds
 anything to the orders he will relieve the officer of the watch, while
 his added instructions are being read and initialed, if necessary.

 The night orders are liable to instruct about:

  +Changes in the course—when—how much—what course.+
  +Cautions as to lights and landfalls expected.+
  +Cautions as to vessels to be met.+
  +Cautions as to weather changes.+
  +Instructions as to calling of Captain, Chief Mate, etc.+
  +Instructions as to getting under way, calling officers, men,
    (when at anchor).+
  +Instructions as to navigation—sights—bearings.+

       *       *       *       *       *

+The Deck.+ Where the Chief Mate stands a bridge watch, the officer of
the watch is generally considered to be in charge of the men on deck,
though they may be engaged at work under the boatswain—work laid out by
the Chief Mate. This, however, is largely a matter of organization. If
the vessel is small, the officer of the watch can keep an eye on things
from the bridge. If he needs assistance of any kind he calls for it. He
directs the taking in of awnings, and sails, if carried, the turning of
ventilators, the closing of the cowls in case of rain.

+Fire.+ In the event of fire:

CALL THE CAPTAIN, if a junior officer, call the Chief Mate also.

At the same time sound the fire alarms.

The usual fire drill then takes place.

The vessel is turned over to the Captain as soon as fire is reported and
the officer of the watch attends at the fire or does as he is directed
by the Captain. The Chief Engineer should also be informed of the fire,
and the engineer on watch is advised of it by telephone or by voice tube.

The wireless operators are advised at once and await the orders of the
Captain, except in case of sudden disaster, when they at once send out
their calls for assistance.

+Being Overtaken.+ When your vessel is being overtaken, set off flare-up
and call Captain at once. On many slow cargo steamers a lookout astern
is almost as necessary as a lookout ahead.

+Running Lights.+ In narrow waters have oil lamps trimmed and ready for
use, in case the electric lights give out. This is very important.

+In War Zone.+ The standing of watches in the war zone is subject to
special precautions.

The following recommendations have been published by the Supervising
Inspector General:

 Recommendations.

 Reliable information is to the effect that many or nearly all of the
 lives that have been lost from vessels after attack has been due to the
 fact that, in many instances, the boats have been launched while the
 ship has had considerable way, either ahead or astern, and that
 engineers have been compelled to abandon the engine room while the
 engines were still working.

 It is suggested, therefore, that the bridge watch, or the master,
 assure themselves, if possible, that the engines are at rest and the
 way off the vessel before the boats are launched. It is also strongly
 recommended that, due to the possibility of the boats on the weather
 side of the ship not being available, the full lifeboat capacity on
 cargo ships be carried on each side so that full capacity may be
 available at all times.

 It is strongly and earnestly recommended that on all vessels entering
 the War Zone, or the dangerous areas, the passengers and crew be kept
 fully prepared (so far as may be possible or the navigation of the
 vessel permits), for speedy and immediate disembarking, or abandoning
 ship in case of emergency, and that the crew be furnished with life
 preservers of such character as to allow the free use of the arms in
 rowing and boat launching. All should be warmly clad without
 unnecessary or hindering incumbrance.

 The requirements and suggestions herein set forth should be met
 promptly and generously, and it is expected that all concerned will
 cooperate in making better and safer conditions in the navigation of
 dangerous areas. Local inspectors, however, will not unnecessarily
 delay vessels from proceeding on their voyage to ports of the Allied
 Governments if it is not possible to meet these requirements previous
 to the appointed time of departure.

 GEO. UHLER,
 _Supervising Inspector General_.

+Zig-zag.+ The great utility of zig-zagging is recognized. The Zig-zag
control apparatus, marketed by Captain Arthur N. McGray of New York, has
special advantages, and watch officers should master its use.

+Bearings.+ Get bearings, +bow and beam+, +two point+, or +cross+, at
every opportunity. Get +vertical angles+, +horizontal angles+,
+tangents+, wherever possible. +Fix+ the vessel as often as you can.

If the vessel carried a three-armed protractor, get the horizontal
angles between any three objects that are visible, and favorably
situated with reference to the vessel, +and are plotted on the chart+.

+Lights.+ See all light houses, and light ships, when you expect to, or
call the Captain.

+Azimuths—Amplitudes.+ Get azimuths and amplitudes at every favorable
opportunity and see the results carefully entered in the deviation log,
so the Captain can inspect them.

+Sights.+ Get sights as often as possible on the watch. With clear
horizon at twilight, get stars east and west, and north and south. Such
a fix is often most important. Check up all dead reckoning by
observations.

+Hydrographic Reports.+ The report blanks furnished by the Hydrographic
Office should be carefully filled out and forwarded. This duty is
usually given to one of the junior officers.

+Pilot Charts.+ The officer on watch can very profitably occupy his mind
in studying the pilot charts furnished by the U. S. Hydrographic Office,
they yield much useful data, and are specially useful in warning of the
existence of derelicts, and their possible drift.

+Derelicts.+ Trace out all derelicts shown in your path with their
possible drift since last report. Always keep a sharp lookout for them,
whether on the pilot chart or not.

+Bridge.+ Many bridges are fitted with comfortable shelters at the
wings—others with elaborate enclosures. A simple work desk should be
provided, when only one officer is on watch, so he can work out
bearings, etc., while on the bridge, facing ahead.

+Useful Desk.+ The desk also serves as a handy table for his sextant, or
for a cup of hot coffee—cabin style.

+Quartermasters.+ Quartermasters are usually carried, and they are under
the immediate charge of the officer of the watch. The care of the
bridge, its neat and shipshape appearance, reflects credit, or
otherwise, on the watch officers.

+Bridge Etiquette.+ The etiquette of the bridge, in the Merchant
Service, especially on the large liners, is as formal and stiff as that
on any battleship. The heights of responsibility are always on high
tension. In the lesser trades, on tramps and the like, officers are more
lax, though they should be no less vigilant.

Salutes are given and returned (on the liners) and uniform is worn.

Relieving officer should be on bridge at least five minutes before eight
bells.

+Commissions M. M.+ The British Merchant Service is at the present time
strongly advocating commissions, by the Government, for Merchant Marine
Officers. With our Shipping Board, and with the growing control by
military and naval authorities over merchantmen, some such plan might be
advisable for American Merchant Marine Officers, and would undoubtedly
help to elevate the standards, and bring the naval and mercantile
services into closer harmony.

+Standard Uniform.+ The British Merchant Service associations are also
agitating the question of some sort of standard uniform for merchant
service, officers and men.

This is a good idea, and should be adopted by Americans. The writer,
however, would not advise the adoption of the naval blouse. This is the
property of the U. S. Navy. Merchant officers, if they adopt any sort of
uniform, should provide themselves with something having pockets, and a
roll collar, and less on the order of a princess gown.

+Conclusion.+ The watch officers of a vessel should be as familiar as
possible with the handling qualities of their vessel:

 Her turning circle.
 Her quickest turn—usually both screws ahead.
 Her shortest turn—inner screw slow astern and the way her head
   scends, under all conditions.
 See that the course is kept religiously—use small helm, be quick and
   courteous. Keep a sharp lookout for signals when passing craft at
   sea—Call Captain—and reply smartly.


THE WATCH OFFICER—IN PORT

While in port, merchant ships, except the larger liners, do not indulge
in the luxury of an officer of the watch, in fact such a gentleman would
be out of place with his telescope under his arm, dodging drafts of
cargo, and listening to the repartee of the stevedores. Everything in
its place, and as common sense rules in the long run, the formalities of
the merchant service have settled down to the more simple courtesies of
life.

A quartermaster should be on gangway watch, cleanly dressed, or in
uniform, if it is worn, to see that only those who have business on
board are admitted to the ship. He should salute the officers, who will
return it.

On Sundays, and Holidays, when cargo is not being worked, and when the
ship is at rest, an officer should be told off to stand day's duty. He
should see that the vessel is in shipshape order, falls neatly coiled,
decks clean, Irish pendants all removed, awnings hauled out taut, flags
closely mast headed and kept clear, and that everything is kept in
immaculate order about the gangway. He should not allow loitering about
the gangway.

[1] Three toots vessel (or light) ahead.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE RULES OF THE ROAD


INTERNATIONAL RULES: I. ENACTING CLAUSE, SCOPE, AND PENALTY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, That the following regulations
for preventing collisions at sea shall be followed by all public and
private vessels of the United States upon the high seas and in all
waters connected therewith, navigable by seagoing vessels.

ARTICLE 30. Nothing in these rules shall interfere with the operation of
a special rule, duly made by local authority, relative to the navigation
of any harbor, river, or inland waters.

PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS

In the following rules every steam vessel which is under sail and not
under steam is to be considered a sailing vessel, and every vessel under
steam, whether under sail or not, is to be considered a steam vessel.

The words "steam vessel" shall include any vessel propelled by machinery.

A vessel is "under way," within the meaning of these rules, when she is
not at anchor, or made fast to the shore, or aground.


INTERNATIONAL RULES: II. LIGHTS, AND SO FORTH

The word "visible" in these rules when applied to lights shall mean
visible on a dark night with a clear atmosphere.

ARTICLE 1. The rules concerning lights shall be complied with in all
weathers from sunset to sunrise, and during such time no other lights
which may be mistaken for the prescribed lights shall be exhibited.

Steam vessels—masthead light.

ART. 2. A steam vessel when under way shall carry—(_a_) On or in front
of the foremast, or if a vessel without a foremast, then in the fore
part of the vessel, at a height above the hull of not less than twenty
feet, and if the breadth of the vessel exceeds twenty feet, then at a
height above the hull not less than such breadth, so, however, that the
light need not be carried at a greater height above the hull than forty
feet, a bright white light, so constructed as to show an unbroken light
over an arc of the horizon of twenty points of the compass, so fixed as
to throw the light ten points on each side of the vessel, namely, from
right ahead to two points abaft the beam on either side, and of such a
character as to be visible at a distance of at least five miles.

Steam vessels—side lights.

(_b_) On the starboard side a green light so constructed as to show an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of ten points of the compass,
so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the
beam on the starboard side, and of such a character as to be visible at
a distance of at least two miles.

(_c_) On the port side a red light so constructed as to show an unbroken
light over an arc of the horizon of ten points of the compass, so fixed
as to throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on
the port side, and of such a character as to be visible at a distance of
at least two miles.

(_d_) The said green and red side lights shall be fitted with inboard
screens projecting at least three feet forward from the light, so as to
prevent these lights from being seen across the bow.

Steam vessels—range lights.

(_e_) A steam vessel when under way may carry an additional white light
similar in construction to the light mentioned in subdivision (_a_).
These two lights shall be so placed in line with the keel that one shall
be at least fifteen feet higher than the other, and in such a position
with reference to each other that the lower light shall be forward of
the upper one. The vertical distance between these lights shall be less
than the horizontal distance.

Steam vessels when towing.

ART. 3. A steam vessel when towing another vessel shall, in addition to
her side lights, carry two bright white lights in a vertical line one
over the other, not less than six feet apart, and when towing more than
one vessel shall carry an additional bright white light six feet above
or below such lights, if the length of the tow measuring from the stern
of the towing vessel to the stern of the last vessel towed exceeds six
hundred feet. Each of these lights shall be of the same construction and
character, and shall be carried in the same position as the white light
mentioned in article two (_a_), excepting the additional light, which
may be carried at a height of not less than fourteen feet above the hull.

Such steam vessel may carry a small white light abaft the funnel or
aftermast for the vessel towed to steer by, but such light shall not be
visible forward of the beam.

Special lights.

ART. 4. (_a_) A vessel which from any accident is not under command
shall carry at the same height as a white light mentioned in article two
(_a_), where they can best be seen, and if a steam vessel in lieu of
that light two red lights, in a vertical line one over the other, not
less than six feet apart, and of such a character as to be visible all
around the horizon at a distance of at least two miles; and shall by day
carry in a vertical line one over the other, not less than six feet
apart, where they can best be seen, two black balls or shapes, each two
feet in diameter.

(_b_) A vessel employed in laying or in picking up a telegraph cable
shall carry in the same position as the white light mentioned in article
two (_a_), and if a steam vessel in lieu of that light three lights in a
vertical line one over the other not less than six feet apart. The
highest and lowest of these lights shall be red, and the middle light
shall be white, and they shall be of such a character as to be visible
all around the horizon, at a distance of at least two miles. By day she
shall carry in a vertical line, one over the other, not less than six
feet apart, where they can best be seen, three shapes not less than two
feet in diameter, of which the highest and lowest shall be globular in
shape and red in color, and the middle one diamond in shape and white.

(_c_) The vessels referred to in this article, when not making way
through the water, shall not carry the side lights, but when making way
shall carry them.

(_d_) The lights and shapes required to be shown by this article are to
be taken by other vessels as signals that the vessel showing them is not
under command and can not therefore get out of the way.

These signals are not signals of vessels in distress and requiring
assistance. Such signals are contained in article thirty-one.

Lights for sailing vessels and vessels in tow.

ART. 5. A sailing vessel under way and any vessel being towed shall
carry the same lights as are prescribed by article two for a steam
vessel under way, with the exception of the white lights mentioned
therein, which they shall never carry.

Lights for small vessels.

ART. 6. Whenever, as in the case of small vessels under way during bad
weather, the green and red side lights can not be fixed, these lights
shall be kept at hand, lighted and ready for use; and shall, on the
approach of or to other vessels, be exhibited on their respective sides
in sufficient time to prevent collision, in such manner as to make them
most visible, and so that the green light shall not be seen on the port
side nor the red light on the starboard side, nor, if practicable, more
than two points abaft the beam on their respective sides. To make the
use of these portable lights more certain and easy the lanterns
containing them shall each be painted outside with the color of the
light they respectively contain, and shall be provided with proper
screens.

Lights for small steam and sail vessels and open boats.

ART. 7. Steam vessels of less than forty, and vessels under oars or
sails of less than twenty tons gross tonnage, respectively, and rowing
boats, when under way, shall not be required to carry the lights
mentioned in article two (_a_), (_b_), and (_c_), but if they do not
carry them they shall be provided with the following lights:

_First._ Steam vessels of less than forty tons shall carry—

(_a_) In the fore part of the vessel, or on or in front of the funnel,
where it can best be seen, and at a height above the gunwale of not less
than nine feet, a bright white light constructed and fixed as prescribed
in article two (_a_), and of such a character as to be visible at a
distance of at least two miles.

(_b_) Green and red side lights constructed and fixed as prescribed in
article two (_b_) and (_c_), and of such a character as to be visible at
a distance of at least one mile, or a combined lantern showing a green
light and a red light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on
their respective sides. Such lanterns shall be carried not less than
three feet below the white light.

_Second._ Small steamboats, such as are carried by seagoing vessels, may
carry the white light at a less height than nine feet above the gunwale,
but it shall be carried above the combined lantern mentioned in
subdivision one (_b_).

_Third._ Vessels under oars or sails of less than twenty tons shall
have ready at hand a lantern with a green glass on one side and a red
glass on the other, which, on the approach of or to other vessels,
shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision, so that the
green light shall not be seen on the port side nor the red light on the
starboard side.

_Fourth._ Rowing boats, whether under oars or sail, shall have ready at
hand a lantern showing a white light which shall be temporarily
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.

The vessels referred to in this article shall not be obliged to carry
the lights prescribed by article four (_a_) and article eleven, last
paragraph.

Lights for pilot vessels.

ART. 8. Pilot vessels when engaged on their station on pilotage duty
shall not show the lights required for other vessels, but shall carry a
white light at the masthead, visible all around the horizon, and shall
also exhibit a flare-up light or flare-up lights at short intervals,
which shall never exceed fifteen minutes.

On the near approach of or to other vessels they shall have their side
lights lighted, ready for use, and shall flash or show them at short
intervals, to indicate the direction in which they are heading, but the
green light shall not be shown on the port side, nor the red light on
the starboard side.

A pilot vessel of such a class as to be obliged to go alongside of a
vessel to put a pilot on board may show the white light instead of
carrying it at the masthead, and may, instead of the colored lights
above mentioned, have at hand, ready for use, a lantern with green glass
on the one side and red glass on the other, to be used as prescribed
above.

Pilot vessels when not engaged on their station on pilotage duty shall
carry lights similar to those of other vessels of their tonnage.

A steam pilot vessel, when engaged on her station on pilotage duty and
in the waters of the United States, and not at anchor, shall, in
addition to the lights required for all pilot boats, carry at a distance
of eight feet below her white masthead light a red light, visible all
around the horizon and of such a character as to be visible on a dark
night with a clear atmosphere at a distance of at least two miles, and
also the colored side lights required to be carried by vessels when
under way.

When engaged on her station on pilotage duty and in waters of the United
States, and at anchor, she shall carry in addition to the lights
required for all pilot boats the red light above mentioned, but not the
colored side lights. When not engaged on her station on pilotage duty,
she shall carry the same lights as other steam vessels.

Lights, etc., of fishing vessels.

ART. 9. Fishing vessels and fishing boats, when under way and when not
required by this article to carry or show the lights hereinafter
specified, shall carry or show the lights prescribed for vessels of
their tonnage under way.

(_a_) Open boats, by which it is to be understood boats not protected
from the entry of sea water by means of a continuous deck, when engaged
in any fishing at night, with outlying tackle extending not more than
one hundred and fifty feet horizontally from the boat into the seaway,
shall carry one all-round white light.

Open boats, when fishing at night, with outlying tackle extending more
than one hundred and fifty feet horizontally from the boat into the
seaway, shall carry one all-round white light, and in addition, on
approaching or being approached by other vessels, shall show a second
white light at least three feet below the first light and at a
horizontal distance of at least five feet away from it in the direction
in which the outlying tackle is attached.

(_b_) Vessels and boats, except open boats as defined in subdivision
(_a_), when fishing with drift nets, shall, so long as the nets are
wholly or partly in the water, carry two white lights where they can
best be seen. Such lights shall be placed so that the vertical distance
between them shall be not less than six feet and not more than fifteen
feet, and so that the horizontal distance between them, measured in a
line with the keel, shall be not less than five feet and not more than
ten feet. The lower of these two lights shall be in the direction of the
nets, and both of them shall be of such a character as to show all
around the horizon, and to be visible at a distance of not less than
three miles.

Within the Mediterranean Sea and in the seas bordering the coasts of
Japan and Korea sailing fishing vessels of less than twenty tons gross
tonnage shall not be obliged to carry the lower of these two lights.
Should they, however, not carry it, they shall show in the same position
(in the direction of the net or gear) a white light, visible at a
distance of not less than one sea mile, on the approach of or to other
vessels.

(_c_) Vessels and boats, except open boats as defined in subdivision
(_a_), when line fishing with their lines out and attached to or hauling
their lines, and when not at anchor or stationary within the meaning of
subdivision (_h_), shall carry the same lights as vessels fishing with
drift nets. When shooting lines, or fishing with towing lines, they
shall carry the lights prescribed for a steam or sailing vessel under
way, respectively.

Within the Mediterranean Sea and in the seas bordering the coast of
Japan and Korea sailing fishing vessels of less than twenty tons gross
tonnage shall not be obliged to carry the lower of these two lights.
Should they, however, not carry it, they shall show in the same position
(in the direction of the lines) a white light, visible at a distance of
not less than one sea mile on the approach of or to other vessels.

(_d_) Vessels when engaged in trawling, by which is meant the dragging
of an apparatus along the bottom of the sea—

_First._ If steam vessels, shall carry in the same position as the white
light mentioned in article two (_a_) a tri-colored lantern so
constructed and fixed as to show a white light from right ahead to two
points on each bow, and a green light and a red light over an arc of the
horizon from two points on each bow to two points abaft the beam on the
starboard and port sides, respectively; and not less than six nor more
than twelve feet below the tri-colored lantern a white light in a
lantern, so constructed as to show a clear, uniform, and unbroken light
all around the horizon.

_Second._ If sailing vessels, shall carry a white light in a lantern, so
constructed as to show a clear, uniform, and unbroken light all around
the horizon, and shall also, on the approach of or to other vessels,
show where it can best be seen a white flare-up light or torch in
sufficient time to prevent collision.

All lights mentioned in subdivision (_d_) first and second shall be
visible at a distance of at least two miles.

(_e_) Oyster dredgers and other vessels fishing with dredge nets shall
carry and show the same lights as trawlers.

(_f_) Fishing vessels and fishing boats may at any time use a flare-up
light in addition to the lights which they are by this article required
to carry and show, and they may also use working lights.

(_g_) Every fishing vessel and every fishing boat under one hundred and
fifty feet in length, when at anchor, shall exhibit a white light
visible all around the horizon at a distance of at least one mile.

Every fishing vessel of one hundred and fifty feet in length or upward,
when at anchor, shall exhibit a white light visible all around the
horizon at a distance of at least one mile, and shall exhibit a second
light as provided for vessels of such length by article eleven.

Should any such vessel, whether under one hundred and fifty feet in
length or of one hundred and fifty feet in length or upward, be attached
to a net or other fishing gear, she shall on the approach of other
vessels show an additional white light at least three feet below the
anchor light, and at a horizontal distance of at least five feet away
from it in the direction of the net or gear.

(_h_) If a vessel or boat when fishing becomes stationary in consequence
of her gear getting fast to a rock or other obstruction, she shall in
daytime haul down the day signal required by subdivision (_k_); at night
show the light or lights prescribed for a vessel at anchor; and during
fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy rain storms make the signal prescribed
for a vessel at anchor. (See subdivision (_d_) and the last paragraph of
article fifteen.)

(_i_) In fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy rain storms drift-net vessels
attached to their nets, and vessels when trawling, dredging, or fishing
with any kind of drag net, and vessels line fishing with their lines
out, shall, if of twenty tons gross tonnage or upward, respectively, at
intervals of not more than one minute make a blast; if steam vessels,
with the whistle or siren, and if sailing vessels, with the fog-horn,
each blast to be followed by ringing the bell. Fishing vessels and boats
of less than twenty tons gross tonnage shall not be obliged to give the
above-mentioned signals; but if they do not, they shall make some other
efficient sound signal at intervals of not more than one minute.

(_k_) All vessels or boats fishing with nets or lines or trawls, when
under way, shall in daytime indicate their occupation to an approaching
vessel by displaying a basket or other efficient signal where it can
best be seen. If vessels or boats at anchor have their gear out, they
shall, on the approach of other vessels, show the same signal on the
side on which those vessels can pass.

The vessels required by this article to carry or show the lights
hereinbefore specified shall not be obliged to carry the lights
prescribed by article four (_a_) and the last paragraph of article
eleven.

Lights for an overtaken vessel.

ART. 10. A vessel which is being overtaken by another shall show from
her stern to such last-mentioned vessel a white light or a flare-up
light.

The white light required to be shown by this article may be fixed and
carried in a lantern, but in such case the lantern shall be so
constructed, fitted, and screened that it shall throw an unbroken light
over an arc of the horizon of twelve points of the compass, namely, for
six points from right aft on each side of the vessel, so as to be
visible at a distance of at least one mile. Such light shall be carried
as nearly as practicable on the same level as the side lights.

Anchor lights.

ART. 11. A vessel under one hundred and fifty feet in length when at
anchor shall carry forward, where it can best be seen, but at a height
not exceeding twenty feet above the hull, a white light, in a lantern so
constructed as to show a clear, uniform, and unbroken light visible all
around the horizon at a distance of at least one mile.

A vessel of one hundred and fifty feet or upwards in length when at
anchor shall carry in the forward part of the vessel, at a height of not
less than twenty and not exceeding forty feet above the hull, one such
light, and at or near the stern of the vessel, and at such a height that
it shall be not less than fifteen feet lower than the forward light,
another such light.

The length of a vessel shall be deemed to be the length appearing in her
certificate of registry.

A vessel aground in or near a fairway shall carry the above light or
lights and the two red lights prescribed by article four (_a_).

Special signals.

ART. 12. Every vessel may, if necessary in order to attract attention,
in addition to the lights which she is by these rules required to carry,
show a flare-up light or use any detonating signal that can not be
mistaken for a distress signal.

Naval lights and recognition signals.

ART. 13. Nothing in these rules shall interfere with the operation of
any special rules made by the Government of any nation with respect to
additional station and signal lights for two or more ships of war or for
vessels sailing under convoy, or with the exhibition of recognition
signals adopted by shipowners, which have been authorized by their
respective Governments and duly registered and published.

Steam vessel under sail by day.

ART. 14. A steam vessel proceeding under sail only, but having her
funnel up, shall carry in daytime, forward, where it can best be seen,
one black ball or shape two feet in diameter.


INTERNATIONAL RULES: III. SOUND SIGNALS FOR FOG, AND SO FORTH

Preliminary.

ART. 15. All signals prescribed by this article for vessels under
way shall be given:

_First._ By "steam vessels" on the whistle or siren.

_Second._ By "sailing vessels" and "vessels towed" on the fog horn.

The words "prolonged blast" used in this article shall mean a blast of
from four to six seconds duration.

A steam vessel shall be provided with an efficient whistle or siren,
sounded by steam or by some substitute for steam, so placed that the
sound may not be intercepted by any obstruction, and with an efficient
fog horn, to be sounded by mechanical means, and also with an efficient
bell. In all cases where the rules require a bell to be used a drum may
be substituted on board Turkish vessels, or a gong where such articles
are used on board small seagoing vessels. A sailing vessel of twenty
tons gross tonnage or upward shall be provided with a similar fog horn
and bell.

In a fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy rain storms, whether by day or
night, the signals described in this article shall be used as follows,
namely:

Steam vessel under way.

(_a_) A steam vessel having way upon her shall sound, at intervals of
not more than two minutes, a prolonged blast.

(_b_) A steam vessel under way, but stopped, and having no way upon her,
shall sound, at intervals of not more than two minutes, two prolonged
blasts, with an interval of about one second between.

Sail vessel under way.

(_c_) A sailing vessel under way shall sound, at intervals of not more
than one minute, when on the starboard tack, one blast; when on the port
tack, two blasts in succession, and when with the wind abaft the beam,
three blasts in succession.

Vessels at anchor or not under way.

(_d_) A vessel when at anchor shall, at intervals of not more than one
minute, ring the bell rapidly for about five seconds.

Vessels towing or towed.

(_e_) A vessel when towing, a vessel employed in laying or in picking up
a telegraph cable, and a vessel under way, which is unable to get out of
the way of an approaching vessel through being not under command, or
unable to maneuver as required by the rules, shall, instead of the
signals prescribed in subdivisions (_a_) and (_c_) of this article, at
intervals of not more than two minutes, sound three blasts in
succession, namely: One prolonged blast followed by two short blasts. A
vessel towed may give this signal and she shall not give any other.

Small sailing vessels and boats.

Sailing vessels and boats of less than twenty tons gross tonnage shall
not be obliged to give the above-mentioned signals, but, if they do not,
they shall make some other efficient sound signal at intervals of not
more than one minute.

Speed in fog.

ART. 16. Every vessel shall, in a fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy rain
storms, go at a moderate speed, having careful regard to the existing
circumstances and conditions.

A steam vessel hearing, apparently forward of her beam, the fog signal
of a vessel the position of which is not ascertained shall, so far as
the circumstances of the case admit, stop her engines, and then navigate
with caution until danger of collision is over.


INTERNATIONAL RULES: IV. STEERING AND SAILING RULES

Preliminary.

Risk of collision can, when circumstances permit, be ascertained by
carefully watching the compass bearing of an approaching vessel. If the
bearing does not appreciably change, such risk should be deemed to exist.

Sailing vessels.

ART. 17. When two sailing vessels are approaching one another, so as to
involve risk of collision, one of them shall keep out of the way of the
other, as follows, namely:

(_a_) A vessel which is running free shall keep out of the way of a
vessel which is closehauled.

(_b_) A vessel which is closehauled on the port tack shall keep out of
the way of a vessel which is closehauled on the starboard tack.

(_c_) When both are running free, with the wind on different sides, the
vessel which has the wind on the port side shall keep out of the way of
the other.

(_d_) When both are running free, with the wind on the same side, the
vessel which is to the windward shall keep out of the way of the vessel
which is to the leeward.

(_e_) A vessel which has the wind aft shall keep out of the way of the
other vessel.

Steam vessels.

ART. 18. When two steam vessels are meeting end on, or nearly end on, so
as to involve risk of collision, each shall alter her course to
starboard, so that each may pass on the port side of the other.

This article only applies to cases where vessels are meeting end on, or
early end on, in such a manner as to involve risk of collision, and does
not apply to two vessels which must, if both keep on their respective
courses, pass clear of each other.

The only cases to which it does apply are when each of the two vessels
is end on, or nearly end on to the other; in other words, to cases in
which, by day, each vessel sees the masts of the other in a line, or
nearly in a line, with her own; and by night, to cases in which each
vessel is in such a position as to see both the side lights of the other.

It does not apply by day to cases in which a vessel sees another ahead
crossing her own course; or by night, to cases where the red light of
one vessel is opposed to the red light of the other, or where the green
light of one vessel is opposed to the green light of the other, or where
a red light without a green light, or a green light without a red light,
is seen ahead, or where both green and red lights are seen anywhere but
ahead.

Two steam vessels crossing.

ART. 19. When two steam vessels are crossing, so as to involve risk of
collision, the vessel which has the other on her own starboard side
shall keep out of the way of the other.

Steam vessel shall keep out of the way of sailing vessel.

ART. 20. When a steam vessel and a sailing vessel are proceeding in such
directions as to involve risk of collision, the steam vessel shall keep
out of the way of the sailing vessel.

Course and speed.

ART. 21. Where, by any of these rules, one of two vessels is to keep out
of the way the other shall keep her course and speed.

NOTE.—When, in consequence of thick weather or other causes, such vessel
finds herself so close that collision can not be avoided by the action
of the giving-way vessel alone, she also shall take such action as will
best aid to avert collision. [See articles twenty-seven and twenty-nine.]

Crossing ahead.

ART. 22. Every vessel which is directed by these rules to keep out of
the way of another vessel shall, if the circumstances of the case admit,
avoid crossing ahead of the other.

Steam vessel shall slacken speed or stop.

ART. 23. Every steam vessel which is directed by these rules to keep out
of the way of another vessel shall, on approaching her, if necessary,
slacken her speed or stop or reverse.

Overtaking vessels.

ART. 24. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules every vessel,
overtaking any other, shall keep out of the way of the overtaken vessel.

Every vessel coming up with another vessel from any direction more than
two points abaft her beam, that is, in such a position, with reference
to the vessel which she is overtaking that at night she would be unable
to see either of that vessel's side lights, shall be deemed to be an
overtaking vessel; and no subsequent alteration of the bearing between
the two vessels shall make the overtaking vessel a crossing vessel
within the meaning of these rules, or relieve her of the duty of keeping
clear of the overtaken vessel until she is finally past and clear.

As by day the overtaking vessel can not always know with certainty
whether she is forward of or abaft this direction from the other vessel
she should, if in doubt, assume that she is an overtaking vessel and
keep out of the way.

Narrow channels.

ART. 25. In narrow channels every steam vessel shall, when it is safe
and practicable, keep to that side of the fairway or mid-channel which
lies on the starboard side of such vessel.

Right of way of fishing vessels.

ART. 26. Sailing vessels under way shall keep out of the way of sailing
vessels or boats fishing with nets, or lines, or trawls. This rule shall
not give to any vessel or boat engaged in fishing the right of
obstructing a fairway used by vessels other than fishing vessels or
boats.

General prudential rule.

ART. 27. In obeying and construing these rules due regard shall be had
to all dangers of navigation and collision, and to any special
circumstances which may render a departure from the above rules
necessary in order to avoid immediate danger.

Sound signals for passing steamers.

ART. 28. The words "short blast" used in this article shall mean a blast
of about one second's duration.

When vessels are in sight of one another, a steam vessel under way, in
taking any course authorized or required by these rules, shall indicate
that course by the following signals on her whistle or siren, namely:

One short blast to mean, "I am directing my course to starboard."

Two short blasts to mean, "I am directing my course to port."

Three short blasts to mean, "My engines are going at full speed
astern."

Precaution.

ART. 29. Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any vessel, or the owner
or master or crew thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to carry
lights or signals, or of any neglect to keep a proper lookout, or of the
neglect of any precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice
of seamen, or by the special circumstances of the case.

ART. 30. Nothing in these rules shall interfere with the operation of a
special rule, duly made by local authority, relative to the navigation
of any harbor, river, or inland waters.

Distress signals.

ART. 31. When a vessel is in distress and requires assistance from other
vessels or from the shore the following shall be the signals to be used
or displayed by her, either together or separately, namely:

In the daytime—

_First._ A gun or other explosive signal fired at intervals of about a
minute.

_Second._ The international code signal of distress indicated by N C.

_Third._ The distance signal, consisting of a square flag, having either
above or below it a ball or anything resembling a ball.

_Fourth._ A continuous sounding with any fog-signal apparatus.

At night—

_First._ A gun or other explosive signal fired at intervals of about a
minute.

_Second._ Flames on the vessel (as from a burning tar barrel, oil
barrel, and so forth).

_Third._ Rockets or shells throwing stars of any color or description,
fired one at a time, at short intervals.

_Fourth._ A continuous sounding with any fog-signal apparatus.


INLAND RULES: I. ENACTING CLAUSE, SCOPE, AND PENALTY

Whereas the provisions of chapter eight hundred and two of the laws of
eighteen hundred and ninety, and the amendments thereto, adopting
regulations for preventing collisions at sea [i.e., international rules
of left-hand column], apply to all waters of the United States connected
with the high seas navigable by seagoing vessels, except so far as the
navigation of any harbor, river, or inland waters is regulated by
special rules duly made by local authority; and

Whereas it is desirable that the regulations relating to the navigation
of all harbors, rivers, and inland waters of the United States, except
the Great Lakes and their connecting and tributary waters as far east as
Montreal and the Red River of the North and rivers emptying into the
Gulf of Mexico and their tributaries, shall be stated in one act:
Therefore,

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, That the following regulations
for preventing collisions shall be followed by all vessels navigating
all harbors, rivers, and inland waters of the United States, except the
Great Lakes and their connecting and tributary waters as far east as
Montreal and the Red River of the North and rivers emptying into the
Gulf of Mexico and their tributaries, and are hereby declared special
rules duly made by local authority:

SEC. 3. That every pilot, engineer, mate, or master of any steam vessel,
and every master or mate of any barge or canal boat, who neglects or
refuses to observe the provisions of this act, or the regulations
established in pursuance of the preceding section [see section 2, page
193], shall be liable to a penalty of fifty dollars, and for all damages
sustained by any passenger in his person or baggage by such neglect or
refusal: Provided, That nothing herein shall relieve any vessel, owner,
or corporation from any liability incurred by reason of such neglect or
refusal.

SEC. 4. That every vessel that shall be navigated without complying with
the provisions of this act shall be liable to a penalty of two hundred
dollars, one-half to go to the informer, for which sum the vessel so
navigated shall be liable and may be seized and proceeded against by
action in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of
the offense.

PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS

In the following rules every steam vessel which is under sail and not
under steam is to be considered a sailing vessel, and every vessel under
steam, whether under sail or not, is to be considered a steam vessel.

The words "steam vessel" shall include any vessel propelled by machinery.

A vessel is "under way," within the meaning of these rules, when she is
not at anchor, or made fast to the shore, or aground.


INLAND RULES: II. LIGHTS AND SO FORTH

The word "visible" in these rules, when applied to lights, shall mean
visible on a dark night with a clear atmosphere.

ARTICLE 1. The rules concerning lights shall be complied with in all
weathers from sunset to sunrise, and during such time no other lights
which may be mistaken for the prescribed lights shall be exhibited.

Steam vessels—masthead light.

ART. 2. A steam vessel when under way shall carry—(_a_) On or in the
front of the foremast, or if a vessel without a foremast, then in the
fore part of the vessel, a bright white light so constructed as to show
an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of twenty points of the
compass, so fixed as to throw the light ten points on each side of the
vessel, namely, from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on either
side, and of such a character as to be visible at a distance of at least
five miles.

Steam vessels—side lights.

(_b_) On the starboard side a green light so constructed as to show an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of ten points of the compass,
so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the
beam on the starboard side, and of such a character as to be visible at
a distance of at least two miles.

(_c_) On the port side a red light so constructed as to show an unbroken
light over an arc of the horizon of ten points of the compass, so fixed
as to throw the light from right ahead to two points abaft the beam on
the port side, and of such a character as to be visible at a distance of
at least two miles.

(_d_) The said green and red side lights shall be fitted with inboard
screens projecting at least three feet forward from the light, so as to
prevent these lights from being seen across the bow.

Steam vessels—range lights.

(_e_) A seagoing steam vessel when under way may carry an additional
white light similar in construction to the light mentioned in
subdivision (_a_). These two lights shall be so placed in line with the
keel that one shall be at least fifteen feet higher than the other, and
in such a position with reference to each other that the lower light
shall be forward of the upper one. The vertical distance between these
lights shall be less than the horizontal distance.

(_f_) All steam vessels (except seagoing vessels and ferryboats), shall
carry in addition to green and red lights required by article two (_b_),
(_c_), and screens as required by article two (_d_), a central range of
two white lights; the after light being carried at an elevation at least
fifteen feet above the light at the head of the vessel. The headlight
shall be so constructed as to show an unbroken light through twenty
points of the compass, namely, from right ahead to two points abaft the
beam on either side of the vessel, and the after light so as to show all
around the horizon.

Steam vessels when towing.

ART. 3. A steam vessel when towing another vessel shall, in addition to
her side lights, carry two bright white lights in a vertical line one
over the other, not less than three feet apart, and when towing more
than one vessel shall carry an additional bright white light three feet
above or below such lights, if the length of the tow measuring from the
stern of the towing vessel to the stern of the last vessel towed exceeds
six hundred feet. Each of these lights shall be of the same construction
and character, and shall be carried in the same position as the white
light mentioned in article two (_a_) or the after range light mentioned
in article two (_f_).

Such steam vessel may carry a small white light abaft the funnel or
aftermast for the vessel towed to steer by, but such light shall not be
visible forward of the beam.

Lights for sailing vessels and vessels in tow.

ART. 5. A sailing vessel under way or being towed shall carry the same
lights as are prescribed by article two for a steam vessel under way,
with the exception of the white lights mentioned therein, which they
shall never carry.

Lights for ferryboats, barges, and canal boats in tow.

SEC. 2. That the supervising inspectors of steam vessels and the
Supervising Inspector-General shall establish such rules to be observed
by steam vessels in passing each other and as to the lights to be
carried by ferryboats and by barges and canal boats when in tow of steam
vessels (and as to the lights and day signals to be carried by vessels,
dredges of all types, and vessels working on wrecks by [or] other
obstruction to navigation or moored for submarine operations, or made
fast to a sunken object which may drift with the tide or be towed) not
inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as they from time to time
may deem necessary for safety, which rules when approved by the
Secretary of Commerce are hereby declared special rules duly made by
local authority, as provided for in article thirty of chapter eight
hundred and two of the laws of eighteen hundred and ninety. Two printed
copies of such rules shall be furnished to such ferryboats (barges,
dredges, canal boats, vessels working on wrecks) and steam vessels,
which rules shall be kept posted up in conspicuous places in such
vessels (barges, dredges, and boats).

Lights for small vessels.

ART. 6. Whenever, as in the case of vessels of less than ten gross tons
under way during bad weather, the green and red side lights can not be
fixed, these lights shall be kept at hand, lighted and ready for use;
and shall, on the approach of or to other vessels, be exhibited on their
respective sides in sufficient time to prevent collision, in such manner
as to make them most visible, and so that the green light shall not be
seen on the port side nor the red light on the starboard side, nor, if
practicable, more than two points abaft the beam on their respective
sides. To make the use of these portable lights more certain and easy
the lanterns containing them shall each be painted outside with the
color of the light they respectively contain, and shall be provided with
proper screens.

ART. 7. Rowing boats, whether under oars or sail, shall have ready at
hand a lantern showing a white light which shall be temporarily
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.

Lights for pilot vessels.

ART. 8. Pilot vessels when engaged on their stations on pilotage duty
shall not show the lights required for other vessels, but shall carry a
white light at the masthead, visible all around the horizon, and shall
also exhibit a flare-up light or flare-up lights at short intervals,
which shall never exceed fifteen minutes.

On the near approach of or to other vessels they shall have their side
lights lighted, ready for use, and shall flash or show them at short
intervals, to indicate the direction in which they are heading, but the
green light shall not be shown on the port side nor the red light on the
starboard side.

A pilot vessel of such a class as to be obliged to go alongside of a
vessel to put a pilot on board may show the white light instead of
carrying it at the masthead, and may, instead of the colored lights
above mentioned, have at hand, ready for use, a lantern with a green
glass on the one side and a red glass on the other, to be used as
prescribed above.

Pilot vessels, when not engaged on their station on pilotage duty, shall
carry lights similar to those of other vessels of their tonnage.

A steam pilot vessel, when engaged on her station on pilotage duty and
in waters of the United States, and not at anchor, shall, in addition to
the lights required for all pilot boats, carry at a distance of eight
feet below her white masthead light a red light, visible all around the
horizon and of such a character as to be visible on a dark night with a
clear atmosphere at a distance of at least two miles, and also the
colored side lights required to be carried by vessels when under way.

When engaged on her station on pilotage duty and in waters of the United
States, and at anchor, she shall carry in addition to the lights
required for all pilot boats the red light above mentioned, but not the
colored side lights. When not engaged on her station on pilotage duty,
she shall carry the same lights as other steam vessels.

Lights, etc., of fishing vessels.

ART. 9. (_a_) Fishing vessels of less than ten gross tons, when under
way and when not having their nets, trawls, dredges, or lines in the
water, shall not be obliged to carry the colored side lights; but every
such vessel shall, in lieu thereof, have ready at hand a lantern with a
green glass on one side and a red glass on the other side, and on
approaching to or being approached by another vessel such lantern shall
be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision, so that the green
light shall not be seen on the port side nor the red light on the
starboard side.

(_b_) All fishing vessels and fishing boats of ten gross tons or upward,
when under way and when not having their nets, trawls, dredges, or lines
in the water, shall carry and show the same lights as other vessels
under way.

(_c_) All vessels, when trawling, dredging, or fishing with any kind of
drag nets or lines, shall exhibit, from some part of the vessel where
they can be best seen, two lights. One of these lights shall be red and
the other shall be white. The red light shall be above the white light,
and shall be at a vertical distance from it of not less than six feet
and not more than twelve feet; and the horizontal distance between them,
if any, shall not be more than ten feet. These two lights shall be of
such a character and contained in lanterns of such construction as to be
visible all round the horizon, the white light a distance of not less
than three miles and the red light of not less than two miles.

Lights for rafts or other craft not provided for.

(_d_) Rafts, or other water craft not herein provided for, navigating by
hand power, horse power, or by the current of the river, shall carry one
or more good white lights, which shall be placed in such manner as shall
be prescribed by the Board of Supervising Inspectors of Steam Vessels.

Lights for an overtaken vessel.

ART. 10. A vessel which is being overtaken by another, except a steam
vessel with an after range light showing all around the horizon, shall
show from her stern to such last-mentioned vessel a white light or a
flare-up light.

Anchor lights.

ART. 11. A vessel under one hundred and fifty feet in length when at
anchor shall carry forward, where it can best be seen, but at a height
not exceeding twenty feet above the hull, a white light, in a lantern so
constructed as to show a clear, uniform, and unbroken light visible all
around the horizon at a distance of at least one mile.

A vessel of one hundred and fifty feet or upwards in length when at
anchor shall carry in the forward part of the vessel, at a height of not
less than twenty and not exceeding forty feet above the hull, one such
light, and at or near the stern of the vessel, and at such a height that
it shall be not less than fifteen feet lower than the forward light,
another such light.

The length of a vessel shall be deemed to be the length appearing in her
certificate of registry.

Special Signals.

ART. 12. Every vessel may, if necessary, in order to attract attention,
in addition to the lights which she is by these rules required to carry,
show a flare-up light or use any detonating signal that can not be
mistaken for a distress signal.

Naval lights and recognition signals.

ART. 13. Nothing in these rules shall interfere with the operation of
any special rules made by the Government of any nation with respect to
additional station and signal lights for two or more ships of war or for
vessels sailing under convoy, or with the exhibition of recognition
signals adopted by shipowners, which have been authorized by their
respective Governments, and duly registered and published.

Steam vessel under sail by day.

ART. 14. A steam vessel proceeding under sail only, but having her
funnel up, may carry in daytime, forward, where it can best be seen, one
black ball or shape two feet in diameter.

INLAND RULES: III. SOUND SIGNALS FOR FOG, AND SO FORTH

Preliminary.

ART. 15. All signals prescribed by this article for vessels under
way shall be given:

1. By "steam vessels" on the whistle or siren.

2. By "sailing vessels" and "vessels towed" on the fog horn.

The words "prolonged blast" used in this article shall mean a blast of
from four to six seconds duration.

A steam vessel shall be provided with an efficient whistle or siren,
sounded by steam or by some substitute for steam, so placed that the
sound may not be intercepted by any obstruction, and with an efficient
fog horn; also with an efficient bell. A sailing vessel of twenty tons
gross tonnage or upward shall be provided with a similar fog horn and
bell.

In fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy rain storms, whether by day or
night, the signals described in this article shall be used as follows,
namely:

Steam vessel under way.

(_a_) A steam vessel under way shall sound, at intervals of not more
than one minute, a prolonged blast.

Sail vessel under way.

(_c_) A sailing vessel under way shall sound, at intervals of not more
than one minute, when on the starboard tack, one blast; when on the port
tack, two blasts in succession, and when with the wind abaft the beam,
three blasts in succession.

Vessels at anchor or not under way.

(_d_) A vessel when at anchor shall, at intervals of not more than one
minute, ring the bell rapidly for about five seconds.

Vessels towing or towed.

(_e_) A steam vessel when towing, shall, instead of the signals
prescribed in subdivision (_a_) of this article, at intervals of not
more than one minute, sound three blasts in succession, namely, one
prolonged blast followed by two short blasts. A vessel towed may give
this signal and she shall not give any other.

Rafts, or other craft not provided for.

(_f_) All rafts or other water craft, not herein provided for,
navigating by hand power, horse power, or by the current of the river,
shall sound a blast of the fog horn, or equivalent signal, at intervals
of not more than one minute.

Speed in fog.

ART. 16. Every vessel shall, in a fog, mist, falling snow, or heavy rain
storms, go at a moderate speed, having careful regard to the existing
circumstances and conditions.

A steam vessel hearing, apparently forward of her beam, the fog signal
of a vessel the position of which is not ascertained shall, so far as
the circumstances of the case admit, stop her engines, and then navigate
with caution until danger of collision is over.


INLAND RULES: IV. STEERING AND SAILING RULES

Preliminary.

Risk of collision can, when circumstances permit, be ascertained by
carefully watching the compass bearing of an approaching vessel. If the
bearing does not appreciably change, such risk should be deemed to exist.

Sailing vessels.

ART. 17. When two sailing vessels are approaching one another, so as to
involve risk of collision, one of them shall keep out of the way of the
other as follows, namely:

(_a_) A vessel which is running free shall keep out of the way of a
vessel which is closehauled.

(_b_) A vessel which is closehauled on the port tack shall keep out of
the way of a vessel which is closehauled on the starboard tack.

(_c_) When both are running free, with the wind on different sides, the
vessel which has the wind on the port side shall keep out of the way of
the other.

(_d_) When both are running free, with the wind on the same side, the
vessel which is to the windward shall keep out of the way of the vessel
which is to the leeward.

(_e_) A vessel which has the wind aft shall keep out of the way of the
other vessel.

Steam vessels.

ART. 18. RULE I. When steam vessels are approaching each other head and
head, that is, end on, or nearly so, it shall be the duty of each to
pass on the port side of the other; and either vessel shall give, as a
signal of her intention, one short and distinct blast of her whistle,
which the other vessel shall answer promptly by a similar blast of her
whistle, and thereupon such vessels shall pass on the port side of each
other. But if the courses of such vessels are so far on the starboard of
each other as not to be considered as meeting head and head, either
vessel shall immediately give two short and distinct blasts of her
whistle, which the other vessel shall answer promptly by two similar
blasts of her whistle, and they shall pass on the starboard side of each
other.

The foregoing only applies to cases where vessels are meeting end on, or
nearly end on, in such a manner as to involve risk of collision; in
other words, to cases in which, by day, each vessel sees the masts of
the other in a line, or nearly in a line, with her own, and by night to
cases in which each vessel is in such a position as to see both the side
lights of the other.

It does not apply by day to cases in which a vessel sees another ahead
crossing her own course, or by night to cases where the red light of one
vessel is opposed to the red light of the other, or where the green
light of one vessel is opposed to the green light of the other, or where
a red light without a green light or a green light without a red light,
is seen ahead, or where both green and red lights are seen anywhere but
ahead.

RULE III. If, when steam vessels are approaching each other, either
vessel fails to understand the course or intention of the other, from
any cause, the vessel so in doubt shall immediately signify the same by
giving several short and rapid blasts, not less than four, of the steam
whistle.

RULE V. Whenever a steam vessel is nearing a short bend or curve in the
channel, where, from the height of the banks or other cause, a steam
vessel approaching from the opposite direction can not be seen for a
distance of half a mile, such steam vessel, when she shall have arrived
within half a mile of such curve or bend, shall give a signal by one
long blast of the steam whistle, which signal shall be answered by a
similar blast given by any approaching steam vessel that may be within
hearing. Should such signal be so answered by a steam vessel upon the
farther side of such bend, then the usual signals for meeting and
passing shall immediately be given and answered; but, if the first alarm
signal of such vessel be not answered, she is to consider the channel
clear and govern herself accordingly.

When steam vessels are moved from their docks or berths, and other boats
are liable to pass from any direction toward them, they shall give the
same signal as in the case of vessels meeting at a bend, but immediately
after clearing the berths so as to be fully in sight they shall be
governed by the steering and sailing rules.

RULE VIII. When steam vessels are running in the same direction, and the
vessel which is astern shall desire to pass on the right or starboard
hand of the vessel ahead, she shall give one short blast of the steam
whistle, as a signal of such desire, and if the vessel ahead answers
with one blast, she shall put her helm to port; or if she shall desire
to pass on the left or port side of the vessel ahead, she shall give two
short blasts of the steam whistle as a signal of such desire, and if the
vessel ahead answers with two blasts, shall put her helm to starboard;
or if the vessel ahead does not think it safe for the vessel astern to
attempt to pass at that point, she shall immediately signify the same by
giving several short and rapid blasts of the steam whistle, not less
than four, and under no circumstances shall the vessel astern attempt to
pass the vessel ahead until such time as they have reached a point where
it can be safely done, when said vessel ahead shall signify her
willingness by blowing the proper signals. The vessel ahead shall in no
case attempt to cross the bow or crowd upon the course of the passing
vessel.

RULE IX. The whistle signals provided in the rules under this article,
for steam vessels meeting, passing, or overtaking, are never to be used
except when steamers are in sight of each other, and the course and
position of each can be determined in the daytime by a sight of the
vessel itself, or by night by seeing its signal lights. In fog, mist,
falling snow or heavy rain storms, when vessels can not see each other,
fog signals only must be given.

Supplementary regulations.

SEC. 2. That the supervising inspectors of steam-vessels and the
Supervising Inspector-General shall establish such rules to be observed
by steam vessels in passing each other and as to the lights to be
carried by ferryboats and by barges and canal boats when in tow of steam
vessels, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as they from
time to time may deem necessary for safety, which rules when approved by
the Secretary of Commerce are hereby declared special rules duly made by
local authority, as provided for in article thirty of chapter eight
hundred and two of the laws of eighteen hundred and ninety. Two printed
copies of such rules shall be furnished to such ferryboats and steam
vessels, which rules shall be kept posted up in conspicuous places in
such vessels.

Two steam vessels crossing.

ART. 19. When two steam vessels are crossing, so as to involve risk of
collision, the vessel which has the other on her own starboard side
shall keep out of the way of the other.

Steam vessel shall keep out of the way of sailing vessel.

ART. 20. When a steam vessel and a sailing vessel are proceeding in such
directions as to involve risk of collision, the steam vessel shall keep
out of the way of the sailing vessel.

Course and speed.

ART. 21. Where, by any of these rules, one of the two vessels is to keep
out of the way, the other shall keep her course and speed. [See articles
twenty-seven and twenty-nine.]

Crossing ahead.

ART. 22. Every vessel which is directed by these rules to keep out of
the way of another vessel shall, if the circumstances of the case admit,
avoid crossing ahead of the other.

Steam vessel shall slacken speed or stop.

ART. 23. Every steam vessel which is directed by these rules to keep out
of the way of another vessel shall, on approaching her, if necessary,
slacken her speed or stop or reverse.

Overtaking vessels.

ART. 24. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules every vessel,
overtaking any other, shall keep out of the way of the overtaken vessel.

Every vessel coming up with another vessel from any direction more than
two points abaft her beam, that is, in such a position, with reference
to the vessel which she is overtaking that at night she would be unable
to see either of that vessel's side lights, shall be deemed to be an
overtaking vessel; and no subsequent alteration of the bearing between
the two vessels shall make the overtaking vessel a crossing vessel
within the meaning of these rules, or relieve her of the duty of keeping
clear of the overtaken vessel until she is finally past and clear.

As by day the overtaking vessel can not always know with certainty
whether she is forward of or abaft this direction from the other vessel
she should, if in doubt, assume that she is an overtaking vessel and
keep out of the way.

Narrow channels.

ART. 25. In narrow channels every steam vessel shall, when it is safe
and practicable, keep to that side of the fairway or mid-channel which
lies on the starboard side of such vessel.

Right of way of fishing vessels.

ART. 26. Sailing vessels under way shall keep out of the way of sailing
vessels or boats fishing with nets, or lines, or trawls. This rule shall
not give to any vessel or boat engaged in fishing the right of
obstructing a fairway used by vessels other than fishing vessels or
boats.

General prudential rule.

ART. 27. In obeying and construing these rules due regard shall be had
to all dangers of navigation and collision, and to any special
circumstances which may render a departure from the above rules
necessary in order to avoid immediate danger.

Sound signals for passing steamers.

[See article eighteen.]

ART. 28. When vessels are in sight of one another a steam vessel under
way whose engines are going at full speed astern shall indicate that
fact by three short blasts on the whistle.

Precaution.

ART. 29. Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any vessel, or the owner
or master or crew thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to carry
lights or signals, or of any neglect to keep a proper lookout, or of the
neglect of any precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice
of seamen, or by the special circumstances of the case.

Lights on United States naval vessels and revenue cutters.

ART. 30. The exhibition of any light on board of a vessel of war of the
United States or a Coast Guard cutter may be suspended whenever, in the
opinion of the Secretary of the Navy, the commander-in-chief of a
squadron, or the commander of a vessel acting singly, the special
character of the service may require it.

Distress signals.

ART. 31. When a vessel is in distress and requires assistance from other
vessels or from the shore the following shall be the signals to be used
or displayed by her, either together or separately, namely:

In the daytime—

A continuous sounding with any fog-signal apparatus, or firing a gun.

At night—

First. Flames on the vessel as from a burning tar barrel, oil barrel,
and so forth.

Second. A continuous sounding with any fog-signal apparatus, or firing a
gun.




CHAPTER XIX

LIMITS OF INLAND WATERS OF THE U. S.


Inland waters on the Atlantic, Pacific, and Gulf coasts of the United
States where the Inland Rules of the Road are to be followed; and inland
waters of the United States bordering on the Gulf of Mexico where the
Inland Rules of the Road or Pilot Rules for Western Rivers are to be
followed.

(All bearings are in degrees true and points magnetic; distances in
nautical miles, and are given approximately.)


Cutler (Little River) Harbor, Me.

A line drawn from Long Point 226° (SW. by W. ⅞ W.) to Little River Head.


Little Machias Bay, Machias Bay, Englishman Bay, Chandler Bay, Moosabec
Reach, Pleasant Bay, Narraguagus Bay, and Pigeon Hill Bay, Me.

A line drawn from Little River Head 232° (WSW. ⅜ W.) to the outer side
of Old Man; thence 234° (WSW. ½ W.) to the outer side of Double Shot
Islands; thence 244° (W. ⅝ S.) to Libby Islands Lighthouse; thence 231½°
(WSW. ¼ W.) to Moose Peak Lighthouse; thence 232½° (WSW. ⅜ W.) to Little
Pond Head; from Pond Point, Great Wass Island, 239° (W. by S.) to outer
side of Crumple Island; thence 249° (W. ¼ S.) to Petit Manan Lighthouse.


All harbors on the coast of Maine, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts
between Petit Manan Lighthouse, Me., and Cape Ann Lighthouses, Mass.

A line drawn from Petit Manan Lighthouse 205½° (SW. ¼ S.), 26½ miles, to
Mount Desert Lighthouse; thence 250½° (W. ⅛ S.), about 33 miles, to
Matinicus Rock Lighthouses; thence 267½° (WNW. ¾ W.), 20 miles, to
Monhegan Island Lighthouse; thence 260° (W. ⅝ N.) 19½ miles, to Seguin
Lighthouse; thence 233° (WSW. ⅛ W.), 18¼ miles, to Portland Light
Vessel; thence 214½° (SW, ⅜ W.), 29½ miles, to Boon Island Lighthouse;
thence 210° (SW.), 11 miles, to Anderson Ledge Spindle, off Isles of
Shoals Lighthouse; thence 176¼° (S. by W.) 19½ miles, to Cape Ann
Lighthouses, Mass.


Boston Harbor.

From Eastern Point Lighthouse 215° (SW. ⅜ W.) 15¾ miles, to The Graves
Lighthouse; thence 139¼° (SSE. ⅜ E.), 7½ miles, to Minots Ledge
Lighthouse.


All Harbors in Cape Cod Bay, Mass.

A line drawn from Plymouth (Gurnet) Lighthouses 77½° (E. ⅛ S.), 16¼
miles, to Race Point Lighthouse.


Nantucket Sound, Vineyard Sound, Buzzards Bay, Narragansett Bay, Block
Island Sound, and Easterly entrance to Long Island Sound.

A line drawn from Chatham Lighthouses, Mass., 146° (S. by E. ¾ E.), 4⅜
miles, to Pollock Rip Slue Light Vessel; thence 142° (SSE. ⅛ E.), 12¾
miles, to Great Round Shoal Entrance Gas and Whistling Buoy (PS); thence
229° (SW. by W. ⅝ W.), 14½ miles, to Sankaty Head Lighthouse; from Smith
Point, Nantucket Island, 261° (W. ⅜ N.), 27 miles, to No Mans Land Gas
and Whistling Buoy, 2; thence 359° (N. by E. ⅛ E.), 8⅛ miles, to Gay
Head Lighthouse; thence 250° (W. ⅝ S.), 34½ miles, to Block Island
Southeast Lighthouse; thence 250½° (W. ⅝ S.), 14¾ miles, to Montauk
Point Lighthouse, on the easterly end of Long Island, N. Y.


New York Harbor.

A line drawn from Rockaway Point Coast Guard Station 159½° (S. by E.),
6¼ miles, to Ambrose Channel Light Vessel; thence 238½° (WSW. ⅛ W.), 8¼
miles, to Navesink (southerly) Lighthouse.


Philadelphia Harbor and Delaware Bay.

A line drawn from Cape May Lighthouse 200° (SSW. ½ W.), 8½ miles, to
Overfalls Light Vessel; thence 246¼° (WSW. ½ W.), 3⅛ miles, to Cape
Henlopen Lighthouse.


Baltimore Harbor and Chesapeake Bay.

A line drawn from Cape Charles Lighthouse 179½° (S. ½ W.) 10½ miles, to
Cape Henry Gas and Whistling Buoy, 2; thence 257° (W. ⅝ S.), 5 miles, to
Cape Henry Lighthouse.


Charleston Harbor.

A line drawn from Ferris Wheel, on Isle of Palms, 154° (SSE. ¼ E.), 7
miles, to Charleston Light Vessel; thence 259° (W. ⅞ S.), through
Charleston Whistling Buoy, 6 C, 7⅝ miles, until Charleston Lighthouse
bears 350° (N. ⅞ W.); thence 270° (W.), 2½ miles, to the beach of Folly
Island.


Savannah Harbor and Calibogue Sound.

A line drawn from Braddock Point, Hilton Head Island, 150½° (SSE. ⅝ E.),
9¾ miles, to Tybee Gas and Whistling Buoy, T (PS); thence 270° (W.), to
the beach of Tybee Island.


St. Simon Sound (Brunswick Harbor) and St. Andrew Sound.

From hotel on beach of St. Simon Island 15⁄16 mile 60° (NE. by E. ¼ E.),
from St. Simon Lighthouse, 130° (SE ½ E.), 6⅞ miles, to St. Simon Gas
and Whistling Buoy (PS); thence 194° (S. by W. ⅛ W.), 8¾ miles, to St.
Andrew Sound Bar Buoy (PS); thence 77° (W.), 4¾ miles, to the shore of
Little Cumberland Island.


St. Johns River, Fla.

A straight line from the outer end of the northerly jetty to the outer
end of the southerly jetty.


Florida Reefs and Keys.

A line drawn from the easterly end of the northerly jetty, at the
entrance to the dredged channel ½ mile northerly of Norris Cut, 94° (E.
¼ S.), 1⅝ miles, to Florida Reefs North End Whistling Buoy, W (HS);
thence 178° (S. ¼ E.), 8 miles, to Biscayne Bay Sea Bell Buoy, 1; thence
182° (S. ⅛ W.), 2⅜ miles, to Fowey Rocks Lighthouse; thence 188° (S. ⅝
W.), 6¾ miles, to Triumph Reef Beacon, O; thence 193° (S. by W.), 4½
miles, to Ajax Reef Beacon, M; thence 194° (S. by W. ⅛ W.), 2 miles, to
Pacific Reef Beacon, L; thence 196½° (S. by W. ⅜ W.), 5 miles, to Turtle
Harbor Sea Buoy, 2; thence 210° (SSW. ½ W.), 4⅞ miles, to Carysfort Reef
Lighthouse; thence 209½° (SSW. ½ W.), 5¾ miles, to Elbow Reef Beacon, J;
thence 217½° (SW. ¾ S.), 9¾ miles, to Molasses Reef Gas Buoy, 2 M;
thence 235½° (SW. ¾ W.), 6 miles, to Conch Reef Beacon, E; thence 234½°
(SW. ¾ W.), through Crocker Reef Beacon, D, 10⅜ miles, to Alligator Reef
Lighthouse; thence 234° (SW. ⅝ W.), 10⅞ miles, to Tennessee Reef Buoy,
4; thence 251° (WSW. ⅛ W.), 10½ miles, to Coffins Patches Beacon, C;
thence 247° (SW. by W. ¾ W.), 8¾ miles, to Sombrero Key Lighthouse;
thence 253½° (WSW. ⅜ W.), 2⅞ miles, to Looe Key Beacon, 6; thence 257½°
(WSW. ¾ W.), 6⅜ miles, to American Shoal Lighthouse; thence 253° (WSW. ¼
W.), 2¼ miles, to Maryland Shoal Beacon, S; thence 259° (WSW. ⅞ W.), 5¼
miles, to Eastern Sambo Beacon, A; thence 253° (WSW. ¼ W.), 2¼ miles, to
Western Sambo Beacon, R; thence 257° (WSW. ⅝ W.), through Western Sambo
Buoy, 2, 5½ miles, to Key West Entrance Gas Buoy (PS); thence 262° (W. ⅞
S.), 4¼ miles, to Sand Key Lighthouse; thence 261° (W. by S.), 2¾ miles,
to Western Dry Rocks Beacon, 2; thence 268° (W. ⅜ S.), 3½ miles, through
Satan Shoal Buoy (HS) to Vestal Shoal Buoy, 1; thence 274½° (W. ⅛ N.),
5¼ miles, to Coal Bin Rock Buoy, CB (HS); thence 324½° (NW. ⅝ N.), 7¼
miles, to Marquesas Keys left tangent; from northwesterly point
Marquesas Keys 59° (NE. by E.), 4¾ miles, to Bar Buoy, 1, Boca Grande
Channel; thence 83° (E. ⅞ N.), 9¾ miles, to Northwest Channel Entrance
Bell Buoy, 1, Northwest Channel into Key West; thence 68° (NE. by E. ⅞
E.), 23½ miles, to northerly side of Content Keys; thence 49° (NE. ¼
E.), 29 miles, to East Cape, Cape Sable.


Charlotte Harbor and Punta Gorda, Fla.

Eastward of Charlotte Harbor Entrance Gas and Bell Buoy (PS), off Boca
Grande, and in Charlotte Harbor, in Pine Island Sound and Matlacha Pass.
Pilot Rules for Western Rivers apply in Peace and Miakka Rivers north of
a 250° and 70° (WSW. and ENE.) line through Mangrove Point Light; and in
Caloosahatchee River northward of the steamboat wharf at Punta Rasa.


Tampa Bay and Tributaries, Fla.

From the southerly end of Long Key 245° (SW. by W. ⅝ W.), 9 miles, to
Tampa Bay Gas and Whistling Buoy (PS); thence 129° (SE. ¾ E.), 6½ miles,
to Bar Bell Buoy (PS), at the entrance to Southwest Channel; thence 103°
(E. by S.), 2¾ miles, to the house on the north end of Anna Maria Key.
Pilot Rules for Western Rivers apply in Manatee River inside Manatee
River Entrance Buoy, 2; in Hillsboro Bay and River inside Hillsboro Bay
Light, 2.


St George Sound, Apalachicola Bay, Carrabelle and Apalachicola Rivers,
and St. Vincent Sound, Fla.

North of a line from Lighthouse Point 246° (SW. by W. ⅝ W.) 13¼ miles,
to southeasterly side of Dog Island; to northward of East Pass Bell
Buoy, 1, at the entrance to East Pass, and inside West Pass Bell Buoy
(PS) at the seaward entrance to West Pass. Pilot Rules for Western
Rivers apply in Carrabelle River inside the entrance to the dredged
channel; in Apalachicola River northward of Apalachicola Dredged Channel
Entrance Buoy, 2.


Pensacola Harbor.

From Caucus Cut Entrance Gas and Whistling Buoy, 1A, 3° (N. ⅛ W.),
tangent to easterly side of Fort Pickens, to the shore of Santa Rosa
Island, and from the buoy northward in the buoyed channel through Caucus
Shoal.


Mobile Harbor and Bay.

From Mobile Entrance Gas and Whistling Buoy (PS) 40° (NE. ⅞ N.) to shore
of Mobile Point, and from the buoy 320° (NW.) to the shore of Dauphin
Island. Pilot Rules for Western Rivers apply in Mobile River above
Choctaw Point.


Sounds, Lakes, and Harbors on the Coasts of Alabama, Mississippi, and
Louisiana, between Mobile Bay entrance and the Delta of the Mississippi
River.

From Sand Island Lighthouse 259° (WSW. ⅝ W.), 43½ miles, to Chandeleur
Lighthouse; westward of Chandeleur and Errol Islands, and west of a line
drawn from the southwesterly point of Errol Island 182° (S. ¼ E.), 23
miles, to Pass a Loutre Lighthouse. Pilot Rules for Western Rivers apply
in Pascagoula River, and in the dredged cut at the entrance to the
river, above Pascagoula River Entrance Light, A, marking the entrance to
the dredged cut.


New Orleans Harbor and the Delta of the Mississippi River.

Inshore of a line drawn from the outermost mud lump showing above low
water at the entrance to Pass a Loutre to a similar lump off the
entrance to Northeast Pass; thence to a similar lump off the entrance to
Southeast Pass; thence to the outermost aid to navigation off the
entrance to South Pass; thence to the outermost aid to navigation off
the entrance to Southwest Pass; thence northerly, about 19½ miles, to
the westerly point of the entrance to Bay Jaque.


Sabine Pass, Tex.

Pilot Rules for Western Rivers apply to Sabine Pass northward of Sabine
Pass Gas and Whistling Buoy (PS), and in Sabine Lake and its
tributaries. Outside of this buoy the International Rules apply.


Galveston Harbor.

A line drawn from Galveston North Jetty Light 129° (SE. by E. ¼ E.), 2
miles, to Galveston Bar Gas and Whistling Buoy (PS); thence 276° (W. ⅛
S.), 2¼ miles, to Galveston (S.) Jetty Lighthouse.


Brazos River, Tex.

Pilot Rules for Western Rivers apply in the entrance and river inside of
Brazos River Entrance Gas and Whistling Buoy (PS). International Rules
apply outside the buoy.


San Diego Harbor.

A line drawn from southerly tower of Coronado Hotel 208° (S. by W.), 5
miles, to Outside Bar Whistling Buoy, SD (PS); thence 345° (NNW. ¾ W.),
3⅝ miles, to Point Loma Lighthouse.


San Francisco Harbor.

A line drawn through Mile Rocks Lighthouse 326° (NW. ⅝ W.), to Bonita
Point Lighthouse.


Columbia River entrance.

A line drawn from knuckle of Columbia River south jetty 351° (NNW. ⅞ W.)
to Cape Disappointment Lighthouse.


Juan de Fuca Strait, Washington and Puget Sounds.

A line drawn from New Dungeness Lighthouse 13½° (N. by W.), 10⅜ miles,
to Hein Bank Gas and Bell Buoy (HS); thence 337½° (NW. ½ W.), 10¾ miles,
to Lime Kiln Light, on west side of San Juan Island; from Bellevue
Point, San Juan Island, 336½° (NW. ¼ W.) to Kellett Bluff, Henry Island;
thence 347° (NW. ⅝ N.) to Turn Point Light; thence 71½° (NE. ⅛ E.), 8¼
miles, to westerly point of Skipjack Island; thence 38½° (N. by E. ¼
E.), 4⅜ miles, to Patos Islands Light; thence 338° (NW. ⅛ W.), 12 miles,
to Point Roberts Light.


General rule.

At all buoyed entrances from seaward to bays, sounds, rivers, or other
estuaries for which specific lines have not been described, Inland Rules
shall apply inshore of a line approximately parallel with the general
trend of the shore, drawn through the outermost buoy or other aid to
navigation of any system of aids.




CHAPTER XX

THE QUARTERMASTERS


For many years the quartermasters—situated somewhere between the deck
hand (A.B.) and the licensed officer—have been the slim loophole through
which a few American boys have slipped into the merchant service of
their country.

The duties of the quartermasters have become fairly standard, and
besides steering in two, and sometimes four hour shifts, the latter a
practice that should be stopped by law, the quartermasters have had to
do about as follows:

 +Care of the bridge.+

 +Care of all signal equipment—flags—rockets—lights—etc.+

 +Care of navigational gear, such as sounding machines, log lines and
 indicators; leads, etc.+

 +Heaving the lead (blue pigeon) and working the sounding machine under
 an officer.+

 +In port, the quartermasters have had to stand gangway watches, and
 watches in the holds while stowing or discharging cargo.+

Quartermasters are a necessity—as signalmen, helmsmen, and generally
useful assistants in the navigation of the vessel. They are the
messengers for the officer of the watch, read the log when sights are
taken, or course is changed, and assist generally.

Steering, however, should be done by all hands, the quartermasters being
relieved for at least half of their watch by one of the seamen. This
practice would result in a largely increased number of competent
helmsmen, and in an increased efficiency all round.

Quartermasters should aim to become officers, and should devote as much
of their time as possible to study, in which the deck officers are
usually ready to assist.

All quartermasters should be certified lifeboat men, and should be
familiar with the handling of ship's boats. They should be charged with
the overhauling of the required lifeboat equipment, under the direction
of one of the officers.




CHAPTER XXI

THE CARPENTER


The carpenter occupies an important position on board ship. He is one of
the "idlers," works all day and turns in at night, like an ordinary
human being; in other words, he stands no watches.

His duties, of course, are defined by his title, but on a well-regulated
vessel, the Carpenter, under orders from the Chief Mate, to whom he
reports in person, performs certain standard tasks.

+Sounding.+ He has charge of the sounding; sounds the bilges and tanks,
and reports their condition each morning, or when specially ordered.

In the event of grounding, or collision, one of the first things to do
is to sound bilges and wells in the vicinity of the damage. This duty
always falls to the Carpenter.

+Tanks.+ Any work done to the tanks—not directly under the Chief
Engineer—is attended to by the Carpenter.

+Tools.+ The Carpenter is responsible for all tools used in the deck
department—outside of marline spikes, fid, rigging screws, etc., which
belong to the Boatswain. He takes care of his shop, keeps an inventory
of his materials, and turns same in to the Chief Mate for approval.

+Cargo Ports.+ The Carpenter should overhaul and attend to the opening
and closing of all cargo ports.

+Hatches.+ Hatches are opened and covered and the tarpaulins battened
down by the Carpenter; he keeps an extra supply of hatch wedges in his
shop.

+Deadlights and Light Ports.+ The Carpenter is charged with the good
order and care of all deadlights and light ports. He should examine all
deadlights in 'tweendeck, where cargo has been carried.

+Fresh Water.+ The Carpenter should examine all fresh water tanks before
filling. He should see them cement washed, when necessary, and should be
in attendance when fresh water is taken on board. When double-bottom
tanks are being filled, he should see that vents are opened for the
escape of air, so they will be completely filled.

+Decks.+ The Carpenter is specially charged with the caulking and repair
of wooden decks. He should keep a supply of deck plugs handy. Caulking
is almost a lost art today.

+Booms—Masts.+ The Carpenter is charged with the upkeep of booms and
masts. He should examine the masts at the partners, whenever the vessel
is unloaded. Runs of rust should be noted and the state of the wedges
and mast coats reported to the Chief Mate, if necessary.

Old booms should be examined in the wake of bands, and probed for dry
rot at the heel. Checks and dangerous cracks—probably puttied up—should
be searched for and reported to the Chief Mate.

+Storm Oil.+ The Carpenter should have charge of the storm-oil tank, and
should see that the drip cocks and pipes leading to the hawse, or over
side, are kept clear, and that the supply of oil required by the U. S.
Inspectors is on hand:

 Vessels of over 200 and not over 1,000 gross tons, 30 gallons.

 Vessels of over 1,000 and not over 3,000 gross tons, 40 gallons.

 Vessels of over 3,000 and not over 5,000 gross tons, 50 gallons.

 Vessels of over 5,000 gross tons shall carry at least 100 gallons.

+General.+ The modern ship carpenter is as much a worker with iron and
steel as he is with wood. His duty requires that he be familiar with
machinery—and his special charge is the braking and releasing of the
windlass, under the direction of the Chief Mate.

A top-notch carpenter is a jewel, he is a scarce article in these
degenerate days of high wages and indifferent performance.

A good artisan can do no better than to go to sea as a carpenter in a
well-found modern steamer; the pay is good he will have comfortable
quarters, and good food, he will also save money. This holds true of
most billets aboard a merchant vessel today.




CHAPTER XXII

THE BOATSWAIN


The Boatswain, for a long time was not in favor on American vessels,
this prejudice being a survival of the hard old sailing-ship days, after
America had ceased to be great with her white wings.

The cheese-paring policy of many owners denied the common sense
arrangement of having a Boatswain—a leading man of the crew—to do the
actual roustabout with the men in holds and on deck. The Mates were
supposed to attend to such matters, and while they juggled hose, and did
other energetic, but senseless duties, other matters of far greater
importance went undone.

Owners are now generally alive to the fact that a Boatswain makes the
Chief Mate about ten times as useful as an officer. He can plan work,
attend to his duties and inspections, while such matters as washing
decks, mixing paints, standing over gangs of chippers, or side cleaners,
goes on without interruption under the Boatswain.

The Duty of the Boatswain is so closely associated with the duty of the
Chief Mate, that it is more or less a matter of repetition to enumerate
just what he is supposed to look after.

Under the Chief Mate, the Boatswain works the men; if in a large vessel,
with the assistance of a Boatswain's Mate. At sea, the watches are
divided between the Boatswain and his Mate.

The Boatswain should be something more than an able seaman, as the term
is known today. Steamers do not carry a sailmaker, and the Boatswain
should be able to sew a seam, sew on a bolt rope, and fit and cut an
awning, or a staysail.

He should understand something about rigging—the splicing of wire
ropes—the turning in of thimbles—the making and rigging of lifeboat
sails (most of them on merchant vessels are an abomination).

+Boatswain's Orders.+ A small book of Boatswains' Orders, filled out by
the Chief Mate helps to keep things straight and the work on deck
progressing. This is specially necessary where the Chief Mate stands a
bridge watch and may be turned in for a part of the day.

+Stands By.+ The Boatswain or his Mate, whoever is on deck, should
always "stand by" for an emergency call from the bridge, to attend to
any work that the officer of the watch may wish to have done.




CHAPTER XXIII

ABLE SEAMEN


The able seaman of the present is an elusive bird who draws twice as
much pay as the Chief Mate of a three-skysail-yarder earned in the slack
days of the past, and his knowledge of seamanship is in the ratio of
nothing to everything. The modern A.B. just is; he arrives at the office
of the Shipping Commissioner, when the crew sign on, and he is there
when they pay off, that is, if he has not become tired of travel, while
on the voyage, and stopped off for rest in foreign ports.

However, better days are dawning for the men of the sea; official
recognition of the seaman, is carrying with it certain requirements as
to real ability. Higher standards bring with them increased respect and
less friction between officers and men. No mate, worthy of the name,
will find fault with a man who can "surge" a ten-inch manila line when
springing a vessel around a pier, or who can turn a splice into a wire
mooring line—any seaman worthy of his pay should be able to do such
things and many others—the official standards, as set forth in a
Department of Commerce circular follow:

 ABLE SEAMEN
 _Department of Commerce Circular No. 264_

 By virtue of the authority conferred by section 13, of the act approved
 March 4, 1915, which provides "That upon examination, under rules
 prescribed by the Department of Commerce as to eyesight, hearing,
 physical condition, and knowledge of the duties of seamanship a person
 found competent may be rated as able seaman after having served on deck
 twelve months at sea, or on the Great Lakes," the following regulations
 are prescribed for determining the knowledge of the duties of
 seamanship of such persons who make application for examination for a
 certificate of service as able seaman:

 1. Any person who has had twelve months' service on deck at sea or on
 the Great Lakes on any vessel of 100 tons gross and upward (except
 those navigating rivers exclusively and the smaller inland lakes, and
 except fishing or whaling vessels or yachts), including decked fishing
 vessels, naval vessels, and coast-guard vessels, may make application
 to any board of local inspectors for a certificate of service as able
 seaman, and upon proof being made to said board by affidavit as to
 service, and examination as to physical condition and knowledge of the
 duties of seamanship, showing the nationality and age of the applicant
 and the vessel or vessels on which he has had service, the board of
 local inspectors shall issue to said applicant a certificate of service
 which shall be retained by him and be accepted as prima facie evidence
 of his rating as able seaman.

 2. No person shall be examined who does not produce satisfactory
 affidavit or affidavits that he has served at sea or on the Great Lakes
 as prescribed in paragraph 1.

 3. Each applicant shall pass the prescribed physical examination before
 a medical officer of the Public Health Service before being permitted
 to take the examination to determine his knowledge of the duties of
 seamanship.

 4. The professional examination to determine the applicant's knowledge
 of the duties of seamanship shall be oral, and shall be conducted in
 the form of questions and answers and by practical tests. The applicant
 shall be examined in each of the prescribed subjects and given a mark
 in each based on a scale of 100.

 5. No person shall be recommended for or shall receive the certificate
 of service as able seaman who fails to attain a general average of
 merit of 70 per cent.

 6. The professional examination may be conducted by an officer of the
 United States Navy, the Coast Guard, Lighthouse Service, Coast and
 Geodetic Survey, Navigation Service, or any other marine officer
 designated by the Secretary of Commerce. When any such officer conducts
 the examination the board of local inspectors shall issue to the
 applicant a certificate of service as able seaman upon receiving notice
 in writing from such an officer that the applicant has passed the
 prescribed examination as to the knowledge of the duties of seamanship.

 7. The professional examination will be conducted as concisely as
 possible, with the view of determining the applicant's qualifications,
 and will embrace the following subjects:

 (_a_) _Boxing the compass._—The applicant will be required to box the
 compass by points or degrees, according to the experience he has had in
 the use of either method.

 (_b_) _Lights and fog signals._—A knowledge will be required of the
 running and anchor lights for steam and sailing vessels on the sea,
 inland waters, or Great Lakes, and a like knowledge of fog signals,
 according to the waters on which the applicant has served.

 (_c_) _Signals for starting, stopping, slowing down, and backing the
 engines of steam vessels._—This examination will be restricted to the
 signals in use on the sea, or Great Lakes, according to the waters on
 which the applicant has served. In view of the widespread use of engine
 telegraphs, knowledge of engine bell signals, while deemed
 advantageous, will not be _required_ if in other respects the candidate
 qualified.

 (_d_) _Passing signals for steam vessels._—To be confined to vessels
 meeting or passing under ordinary conditions.

 (_e_) _Knotting, bending, splicing, and hitching._—The applicant will
 be required to make a few of the principal knots, bends, splices, and
 hitches in common use by sailormen.

 (_f_) _Ability to pull an oar._—The applicant's knowledge of pulling an
 oar will be determined by actual trial in a boat.

 (_g_) _Clearing away, lowering, and getting away from the ship._—The
 applicant's ability will be determined by actual trial aboard ship.

 (_h_) _Handling boats at sea._—This examination will include questions
 relative to the proper handling of a boat in running before a heavy
 sea; in pulling into a sea; the trim of the boat; and steering with an
 oar, tiller, or yoke.

 (_i_) _Knowledge of nautical terms._—The applicant will be required to
 definitely locate different parts of a ship, and to give the names of
 the different masts, sails, rigging davits, etc.

 (_j_) _Steering._—The applicant will be required to demonstrate his
 knowledge of handling the wheel of a steamer by obeying orders passed
 to him as "wheelman."

 WILLIAM C. REDFIELD,
 _Secretary_.

The able seaman should also know the following:

 Markings and use of the hand lead.
 Handling of a boat under sail.
 Running a steam winch.
 Slinging a scaffold plank.
 Use of the life line and breeches buoy—that is what to do
   on the ship end of the line.
 Use of rockets.
 Use of line-throwing gun.
 Use of the heaving line.
 Slinging a cask.
 Sewing canvas.
 International Code Flags.
 Hand semaphore signals.

An able seaman might know a lot more, but the above coupled with the
things mentioned by Mr. Redfield, should turn him out as a competent
American sailorman.

The following common sense advice taken from the pages of the Coast
Seamen's Journal, on "Teaching Seamanship", is given—it clearly sets
forth the things a modern merchant sailorman should know.

 Were we asked to prescribe a course of instruction in seamanship for
 beginners, we should arrange it somewhat as follows:

 First—Teach the pupil the names, locations and uses of the different
 parts of the ship, and of her spars, sails, standing and running
 riggings; together with the meaning of such terms as port, starboard,
 lee, weather, astern, ahead, abaft, aloft and alow.

 Second—Show him how to box the compass and, if possible, how to steer.
 Explain to him the meaning of the commands, "Hard up" and "Hard down
 the helm," and why he must turn the wheel to port when ordered to
 starboard the helm, and vice versa. Also show him the marks on the hand
 leadline.

 Third—Teach him how to whip a rope; how to make a clinch; how to tie a
 reef knot; how to make the bends and hitches commonly used on a ship,
 such as a bowline, clove hitch, sheet bend, anchor bend, rolling hitch,
 timber hitch, bow line on a bight, cat's paw, blackwall hitch,
 midshipman's hitch, single carrick bend, sheepshank, etc. Also how to
 put on a strop and how to shorten a cargo sling.

 Fourth—Take up splicing and knotting—eye splice, short splice, long
 splice, crown and wall knot, lanyard knot and manrope knot. Instruct
 the learner how to worm, parcel and serve a rope; how to put on a
 seizing; how to pass the head earing on a sail; how to put on a
 ratline; how to make plain sennit and paunch mats, and explain their
 uses.

 Fifth—Give the pupils a thorough drilling in the loosing, setting,
 taking in, reefing and furling of the sails; in bracing the yards; in
 catting and fishing the anchors; in pulling boats and handling of oars;
 in sending the lighter spars down on deck and up again, and such other
 maneuvers as are generally recognized as necessary to the safe
 navigation of ships. In fact, these drills might, with great benefit to
 the learners, alternate daily with the instruction in the other details
 of seamanship.

 A willing, healthy young fellow, who has gone through a course of
 training as outlined above, will, with two or three months of actual
 seafaring behind him, be well worth his keep and wages as a sailor. The
 experience he will then be daily gaining will soon fill up the gaps in
 his nautical education necessarily left by his hurried training ship
 instruction, till in another year or two he will have developed into a
 full-fledged able seaman. If he then chooses to take up with "fancy
 work"—and they usually do—all good and well. But safety first. And
 safety for a man before the mast lies in knowing how to perform in a
 shipshape manner the daily, prosaic, everyday routine duties of an able
 seaman.

The laws governing the American Seaman, in which are incorporated the
laws known as the "Seamen's Act," follow. They are of interest to every
one who is governed by them. Laws are made to provide for the proper
regulation of our affairs, and no matter how wordy, the intent is to
uphold recognized authority, and be just to all—+sea lawyers take
notice+.




CHAPTER XXIV

U. S. NAVIGATION LAWS GOVERNING MERCHANT SEAMEN


Definitions.

In the construction of this Title [R. S., 4501-4613], every person
having the command of any vessel belonging to any citizen of the United
States shall be deemed to be the "master" thereof; and every person
(apprentices excepted) who shall be employed or engaged to serve in any
capacity on board the same shall be deemed and taken to be a "seaman;"
and the term "vessel" shall be understood to comprehend every
description of vessel navigating on any sea or channel, lake or river,
to which the provisions of this Title may be applicable, and the term
"owner" shall be taken and understood to comprehend all the several
persons, if more than one, to whom the vessel shall belong. (R. S.,
4612.)


Exemption for militia duty.

Pilots, mariners actually employed in the sea service of any citizen or
merchant within the United States, and all persons who are exempted by
the laws of the respective States or Territories shall be exempted from
militia duty, without regard to age. (Jan. 26, 1903; sec. 2.)


Form of articles of agreement.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

(Date and place of first signature of agreement, including name of
shipping-office.)

It is agreed between the master and seamen or mariners of the ———— ————,
of which ———— ———— is at present master, or whoever shall go for master,
now bound from the port of ————, ————, to ————, ————, (here the voyage
is to be described, and the places named at which the vessel is to
touch, or if that cannot be done, the general nature and probable length
of the voyage is to be stated.)

And the said crew agree to conduct themselves in an orderly, faithful,
honest, and sober manner, and to be at all times diligent in their
respective duties, and to be obedient to the lawful commands of the said
master, or of any person who shall lawfully succeed him, and of their
superior officers in everything relating to the vessel, and the stores
and cargo thereof, whether on board, in boats, or on shore; and in
consideration of which service, to be duly performed, the said master
hereby agrees to pay the said crew, as wages, the sums against their
names respectively expressed, and to supply them with provisions
according to the annexed scale. And it is hereby agreed that any
embezzlement, or willful or negligent destruction of any part of the
vessel's cargo or stores, shall be made good to the owner out of the
wages of the person guilty of the same; and if any person enters himself
as qualified for a duty which he proves himself incompetent to perform,
his wages shall be reduced in proportion to his incompetency. And it is
also agreed that if any member of the crew considers himself to be
aggrieved by any breach of the agreement or otherwise, he shall
represent the same to the master or officer in charge of the vessel, in
a quiet and orderly manner, who shall thereupon take such steps as the
case may require. And it is also agreed that (here any other
stipulations may be inserted to which the parties agree, and which are
not contrary to law).

In witness whereof the said parties have subscribed their names hereto,
on the days against their respective signatures mentioned.

Signed by ———— ————, master, on the ———— day of ————, eighteen hundred
and ————.

 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Signature of crew.           |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Birthplace.                  |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Age.                         |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Height.           Feet.      |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |                  Inches.    |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Description.      Complexion.|                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |                  Hair.      |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Wages per month.             |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Wages per run.               |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Amount of allotment.         |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Time of service.  Months.    |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |                  Days.      |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Whole wages.                 |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Wages due.                   |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Place and time of entry.     |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Time at which he is to       |                    |
 |be on board.                 |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |In what capacity.            |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Shipping commissioner's      |                    |
 |signature or initials.       |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Allotment payable to—        |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+
 |Conduct qualifications.      |                    |
 +-----------------------------+--------------------+

(June 26, 1884; sec. 10; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 24.)

NOTE.—In the place for signatures and descriptions of men engaged after
the first departure of the ship, the entries are to be made as above,
except that the signatures of the consul or vice-consul, officer of
customs, or witness before whom the man is engaged, is to be substituted
for that of the shipping-master.


Scale of provisions to be allowed and served out to crew during
the voyage.

 -----------------------+------+------+-------+-------+------+------+------
                        |Sunday|Monday|Tuesday|Wednes-|Thurs-|Friday|Satur-
                        |      |      |       | day   | day  |      | day
 -----------------------+------+------+-------+-------+------+------+------
 Water            quarts|  5   |  5   |   5   |   5   |  5   |  5   |  5
 Biscuit           pound|  ½   |  ½   |   ½   |   ½   |  ½   |  ½   |  ½
 Beef, salt       pounds|      |      |   1¼  |       |  1¼  |      |  1¼
 Pork, salt        pound|      |  1   |       |   1   |      |  1   |
 Flour             pound|  ½   |      |   ½   |       |  ½   |      |
 Canned meat       pound|  1   |      |       |   1   |      |      |
 Fresh bread      pounds|  1½  |  1½  |   1½  |   1½  |  1½  |  1½  |
 Fish, dry,             |      |      |       |       |      |      |
   preserved            |      |      |       |       |      |      |
   or fresh        pound|      |      |       |       |      |  1   |
 Potatoes or yams  pound|  1   |  1   |   1   |   1   |  1   |  1   |  1
 Canned tomatoes   pound|  ½   |      |       |       |      |  ½   |
 Peas               pint|      |      |   ⅓   |       |      |  ⅓   |
 Beans              pint|      |  ⅓   |       |   ⅓   |      |      |
 Rice               pint|      |  ⅓   |       |       |      |      |  ⅓
 Coffee (green          |      |      |       |       |      |      |
   berry)          ounce|  ¾   |  ¾   |   ¾   |   ¾   |  ¾   |  ¾   |  ¾
 Tea               ounce|  ⅛   |  ⅛   |   ⅛   |   ⅛   |  ⅛   |  ⅛   |  ⅛
 Sugar            ounces|  3   |  3   |   3   |   3   |  3   |  3   |  3
 Molasses           pint|  ½   |      |   ½   |       |  ½   |      |
 Dried fruit      ounces|  3   |      |   3   |       |  3   |      |
 Pickles            pint|      |  ¼   |       |   ¼   |      |  ¼   |
 Vinegar            pint|      |      |   ½   |       |      |      |  ½
 Corn meal        ounces|  4   |      |       |       |  4   |      |
 Onions           ounces|  4   |      |       |       |  4   |      |
 Lard              ounce|  1   |  1   |   1   |   1   |  1   |  1   |  1
 Butter           ounces|  2   |  2   |   2   |   2   |  2   |  2   |  2
 Mustard, pepper,       |      |      |       |       |      |      |
   and salt sufficient  |      |      |       |       |      |      |
   for seasoning.       |      |      |       |       |      |      |
 -----------------------+------+------+-------+-------+------+------+------


Substitutes.

One pound of flour daily may be substituted for the daily ration of
biscuit or fresh bread; two ounces of desiccated vegetables for one
pound of potatoes or yams; six ounces of hominy, oatmeal, or cracked
wheat, or two ounces of tapioca, for six ounces of rice; six ounces of
canned vegetables for one-half pound of canned tomatoes; one-eighth of
an ounce of tea for three-fourths of an ounce of coffee; three-fourths
of an ounce of coffee for one-eighth of an ounce of tea; six ounces of
canned fruit for three ounces of dried fruit; one-half ounce of lime
juice for the daily ration of vinegar; four ounces of oatmeal or cracked
wheat for one-half pint of corn meal; two ounces of pickled onions for
four ounces of fresh onions.

When the vessel is in port and it is possible to obtain the same,
one-and-one-half pounds of fresh meat shall be substituted for the daily
rations of salt and canned meat; one-half pound of green cabbage for one
ration of canned tomatoes; one-half pound of fresh fruit for one ration
of dried fruit. Fresh fruit and vegetables shall be served while in port
if obtainable. The seamen shall have the option of accepting the fare
the master may provide, but the right at any time to demand the
foregoing scale of provisions. The foregoing scale of provisions shall
be inserted in every article of agreement, and shall not be reduced by
any contract, except as above, and a copy of the same shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in the galley and in the forecastle of each vessel.
[Fishing or whaling vessels or yachts exempt—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26.]
(R. S., 4612; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 23; Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 10.)


Account of apprentices on board.

 +-------------------+-----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+
 |   Christian and   | Date of   |Port at which| Date of   |Port at which |
 |    surname of     |registry of|indenture was|register of|assignment was|
 |apprentice in full.|indenture. | registered. |assignment.| registered.  |
 +-------------------+-----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+
 |                   |           |             |           |              |
 |                   |           |             |           |              |
 +-------------------+-----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+

(R. S., 4612.)


Certificate of discharge.

 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Name and official number   |                  |
 |of ship.                   |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Port of registry.          |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Tonnage.                   |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Description of voyage or   |                  |
 |employment.                |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Name of seaman.            |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Place of birth.            |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Date of birth.             |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Character.                 |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Declines to give statement |                  |
 |of character.              |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Capacity.                  |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Date of entry.             |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Date of discharge.         |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+
 |Place of discharge.        |                  |
 +---------------------------+------------------+

I certify that the above particulars are correct, and that the
above-named seaman was discharged accordingly.

Dated ———— day of ————, eighteen hundred and ————.

 (Signed) ———— ————, Master.
 (Countersigned) ———— ————, Seaman.

Given to the above-named seaman in my presence this ———— day of ————,
eighteen hundred and ————.

 (Signed) ———— ————,

 Shipping-Commissioner.
 (R. S., 4612.)


Naturalization and citizenship of seamen.

Every seaman, being a foreigner, who declares his intention of becoming
a citizen of the United States in any competent court, and shall have
served three years on board of a merchant vessel of the United States
subsequent to the date of such declaration, may, on his application to
any competent court, and the production of his certificate of discharge
and good conduct during that time, together with the certificate of his
declaration of intention to become a citizen, be admitted a citizen of
the United States; and every seaman, being a foreigner, shall, after his
declaration of intention to become a citizen of the United States, and
after he shall have served such three years, be deemed a citizen of the
United States for the purpose of manning and serving on board any
merchant-vessel of the United States, anything to the contrary in any
act of Congress notwithstanding; but such seaman shall, for all purposes
of protection as an American citizen, be deemed such, after the filing
of his declaration of intention to become such citizen. (R. S., 2174.)

The collector of every district shall keep a book or books, in which, at
the request of any seaman, being a citizen of the United States of
America, and producing proof of his citizenship, authenticated in the
manner hereinafter directed, he shall enter the name of such seaman, and
shall deliver to him a certificate, in the following form, that is to
say: "I, A. B., collector of the district of D., do hereby certify,
that E. F., an American seaman, aged ———— years, or thereabouts, of the
height of ———— feet ———— inches, (describing the said seaman as
particularly as may be,) has, this day, produced to me proof in the
manner directed by law; and I do hereby certify that the said E. F. is a
citizen of the United States of America. In witness whereof, I have
hereunto set my hand and seal of office, this ———— day of ————." It
shall be the duty of the collectors to file and preserve the proofs of
citizenship so produced. (R. S., 4588; June 19, 1886.)

The collector of every port of entry in the United States shall send a
list of the seaman to whom certificates of citizenship have been
granted, once every three months, to the Secretary of State [together
with an account of such impressments or detentions, as shall appear, by
the protests of the masters, to have taken place.] (R. S., 4591.)


Shipping officers.

The general duties of a shipping-commissioner shall be:

 _First._ To afford facilities for engaging seamen by keeping a register
 of their names and characters.

 _Second._ To superintend their engagement and discharge, in manner
 prescribed by law.

 _Third._ To provide means for securing the presence on board at the
 proper times of men who are so engaged.

 _Fourth._ To facilitate the making of apprenticeships to the sea
 service.

 _Fifth._ To perform such other duties relating to merchant seamen or
 merchant ships as are now or may hereafter be required by law.

In any port in which no shipping-commissioner shall have been appointed,
the whole or any part of the business of a shipping-commissioner shall
be conducted by the collector or deputy collector of customs of such
port; and in respect of such business such custom-house shall be deemed
a shipping-office, and the collector or deputy collector of customs to
whom such business shall be committed, shall, for all purposes, be
deemed a shipping-commissioner within the meaning of this Title [R. S.,
4501-4613]. (R. S., 4503.)

Every shipping-commissioner, and every clerk or employé in any
shipping-office, who demands or receives any remuneration whatever,
either directly or indirectly, for hiring or supplying any seaman for
any merchant-vessels, excepting the lawful fees payable under this Title
[R. S., 4501-4613], shall, for every such offense, be liable to a
penalty of not more than two hundred dollars. [Fees payable by
individuals abolished June 19, 1886.] (R. S., 4595; Mar. 4, 1911; June
19, 1886; R. S., 4508.)


Illegal shipments.

Whoever, with intent that any person shall perform service or labor of
any kind on board of any vessel engaged in trade and commerce among the
several States or with foreign nations, or on board of any vessel of the
United States engaged in navigating the high seas or any navigable water
of the United States, shall procure or induce, or attempt to procure or
induce, another, by force or threats or by representations which he
knows or believes to be untrue, or while the person so procured or
induced is intoxicated or under the influence of any drug, to go on
board of any such vessel, or to sign or in anywise enter into any
agreement to go on board of any such vessel to perform service or labor
thereon; or whoever shall knowingly detain on board of any such vessel
any person so procured or induced to go on board thereof, or to enter
into any agreement to go on board thereof, by any means herein defined;
or whoever shall knowingly aid or abet in the doing of any of the things
herein made unlawful, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars,
or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (Mar. 4, 1909; sec. 82;
Repeals act of Mar. 2, 1907.)

All shipments of seamen made contrary to the provisions of any act of
Congress shall be void; and any seaman so shipped may leave the service
at any time, and shall be entitled to recover the highest rate of wages
of the port from which the seaman was shipped, or the sum agreed to be
given him at his shipment. (R. S., 4523.)


Owners or masters may ship seamen in certain cases.

Any person other than a commissioner under this Title [R. S.,
4501-4613], who shall perform or attempt to perform, either directly or
indirectly, the duties which are by this Title set forth as pertaining
to a shipping-commissioner, shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than five hundred dollars.

Nothing in this Title [R. S., 4501-4613], however, shall prevent the
owner, or consignee, or master of any vessel except vessels bound from a
port in the United States to any foreign port, other than vessels
engaged in trade between the United States and the British North
American possessions, or the West India Islands, or the republic of
Mexico, and vessels of the burden of seventy-five tons or upward bound
from a port on the Atlantic to a port on the Pacific, or vice versa,
from performing, himself, so far as his vessel is concerned, the duties
of shipping-commissioner under this Title. Whenever the master of any
vessel shall engage his crew, or any part of the same, in any
collection-district where no shipping-commissioner shall have been
appointed, he may perform for himself the duties of such commissioner.
(R. S., 4504.)


Apprentices.

Every shipping-commissioner appointed under this Title [R. S.,
4501-4613] shall, if applied to for the purpose of apprenticing boys to
the sea-service, by any master or owner of a vessel, or by any person
legally qualified, give such assistance as is in his power for
facilitating the making of such apprenticeships; but the shipping-
commissioner shall ascertain that the boy has voluntarily consented to
be bound, and that the parents or guardian of such boy have consented to
such apprenticeship, and that he has attained the age of twelve years,
and is of sufficient health and strength, and that the master to whom
such boy is to be bound is a proper person for the purpose. Such
apprenticeship shall terminate when the apprentice becomes eighteen
years of age. The shipping-commissioner shall keep a register of all
indentures of apprenticeship made before him. (R. S., 4509.)

The master of every foreign-going vessel shall, before carrying any
apprentice to sea from any place in the United States, cause such
apprentice to appear before the shipping-commissioner before whom the
crew is engaged, and shall produce to him the indenture by which such
apprentice is bound, and the assignment or assignments thereof, if any;
and the name of the apprentice, with the date of the indenture and of
the assignment or assignments thereof, if any, shall be entered on the
agreement; which shall be in the form, as near as may be, given in the
table marked "A" in the schedule annexed to this Title [R. S.,
4501-4613]; and no such assignment shall be made without the approval of
a commissioner, of the apprentice, and of his parents or his guardian.
For any violation of this section, the master shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than one hundred dollars. (R. S., 4510.)


Agreement to ship in foreign trade.

The master of every vessel bound from a port in the United States to any
foreign port other than vessels engaged in trade between the United
States and the British North American possessions, or the West India
Islands, or the republic of Mexico, or of any vessel of the burden of
seventy-five tons or upward, bound from a port on the Atlantic to a port
on the Pacific, or vice versa, shall, before he proceeds oh such voyage,
make an agreement, in writing or in print, with every seaman whom he
carries to sea as one of the crew, in the manner hereinafter mentioned;
and every such agreement shall be, as near as may be, in the form given
in the table Marked A, in the schedule annexed to this Title [R. S.,
4501-4613], and shall be dated at the time of the first signature
thereof, and shall be signed by the master before any seaman signs the
same, and shall contain the following particulars:

 _First._ The nature and, as far as practicable, the duration of the
 intended voyage or engagement, and the port or country at which the
 voyage is to terminate.

 _Second._ The number and description of the crew, specifying their
 respective employments.

 _Third._ The time at which each seaman is to be on board, to begin work.

 _Fourth._ The capacity in which each seaman is to serve.

 _Fifth._ The amount of wages which each seaman is to receive.

 _Sixth._ A scale of the provisions which are to be furnished to each
 seaman.

 _Seventh._ Any regulations as to conduct on board and as to fines,
 short allowances of provisions, or other lawful punishments for
 misconduct, which may be sanctioned by Congress or authorized by the
 Secretary of Commerce and Labor not contrary to or not otherwise
 provided for by law, which the parties agree to adopt.

 _Eighth._ Any stipulations in reference to allotment of wages, or other
 matters not contrary to law. [Repealed so far as relates to allotments
 in trade between the United States, Dominion of Canada, Newfoundland,
 the West Indies and Mexico, and coasting trade of the United States,
 except between Atlantic and Pacific ports, by sec. 25 of Act of
 December 21, 1898.] (R. S., 4511; Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 19; Feb. 14, 1903;
 sec. 10; June 26, 1884; sec. 10; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 25.)

The following rules shall be observed with respect to agreements:

 _First._ Every agreement except such as are otherwise specially
 provided for, shall be signed by each seaman in the presence of a
 shipping-commissioner.

 _Second._ When the crew is first engaged the agreement shall be
 signed in duplicate, and one part shall be retained by the shipping-
 commissioner, and the other part shall contain a special place or form
 for the description and signatures of persons engaged subsequently to
 the first departure of the ship, and shall be delivered to the master.

 _Third._ Every agreement entered into before a shipping-commissioner
 shall be acknowledged and certified under the hand and official seal of
 such commissioner. The certificate of acknowledgment shall be indorsed
 on or annexed to the agreement; and shall be in the following form:

 "State of ————, County of ————:

 "On this ———— day of ————, personally appeared before me, a
 shipping-commissioner in and for the said county, A. B., C. D., and E.
 F., severally known to me to be the same persons who executed the
 foregoing instrument, who each for himself acknowledged to me that he
 had read or had heard read the same; that he was by me made acquainted
 with the conditions thereof, and understood the same; and that, while
 sober and not in a state of intoxication, he signed it freely and
 voluntarily, for the uses and purposes therein mentioned." (R. S.,
 4512.)

Section 4511 shall not apply to masters of vessels where the seamen are
by custom or agreement entitled to participate in the profits or result
of a cruise or voyage, nor to masters of coastwise nor to masters of
lake-going vessels that touch at foreign ports; but seamen may, by
agreement, serve on board such vessels a definite time, or, on the
return of any vessel to a port in the United States, may reship and sail
in the same vessel on another voyage, without the payment of additional
fees to the shipping-commissioner.

[NOTE.—Sec. 4511, however, does apply in part to masters of coastwise
vessels whose crews are shipped under provisions of the act of Feb. 18,
1895.] (R. S., 4513; Feb. 18, 1895; June 19, 1886.)

The master shall, at the commencement of every voyage or engagement,
cause a legible copy of the agreement, omitting signatures, to be placed
or posted up in such part of the vessel as to be accessible to the crew;
and on default shall be liable to a penalty of not more than one hundred
dollars. (R. S., 4519.)


Period of engagement.

A master of a vessel in the foreign trade may engage a seaman at any
port in the United States, in the manner provided by law, to serve on a
voyage to any port, or for the round trip from and to the port of
departure, or for a definite time, whatever the destination. The master
of a vessel making regular and stated trips between the United States
and a foreign country may engage a seaman for one or more round trips,
or for a definite time, or on the return of said vessel to the United
States may reship such seamen for another voyage in the same vessel, in
the manner provided by law, without the payment of additional fees to
any officer for such reshipment or re-engagement. (June 26, 1884; sec.
19.)


Penalty for shipment without agreement.

If any person shall be carried to sea, as one of the crew on board of
any vessel making a voyage as hereinbefore specified, without entering
into an agreement with the master of such vessel, in the form and
manner, and at the place and times in such cases required, the vessel
shall be held liable for each such offense to a penalty of not more than
two hundred dollars. But the vessel shall not be held liable for any
person carried to sea, who shall have secretly stowed away himself
without the knowledge of the master, mate, or of any of the officers of
the vessel, or who shall have falsely personated himself to the master,
mate, or officers of the vessel, for the purpose of being carried to
sea. (R. S., 4514.)

If any master, mate, or other officer of a vessel knowingly receives, or
accepts, to be entered on board of any merchant-vessel, any seaman who
has been engaged or supplied contrary to the provisions of this Title
[R. S., 4501-4613], the vessel on board of which such seaman shall be
found shall, for every such seaman, be liable to a penalty of not more
than two hundred dollars. (R. S., 4515.)


Shipment in foreign ports before consuls.

Every master of a merchant-vessel who engages any seaman at a place out
of the United States, in which there is a consular officer or commercial
agent, shall, before carrying such seaman to sea, procure the sanction
of such officer, and shall engage seamen in his presence; and the rules
governing the engagement of seamen before a shipping-commissioner in the
United States, shall apply to such engagements made before a consular
officer or commercial agent; and upon every such engagement the consular
officer or commercial agent shall indorse upon the agreement his
sanction thereof, and an attestation to the effect that the same has
been signed in his presence, and otherwise duly made. (R. S., 4517.)

Every master who engages any seaman in any place in which there is a
consular officer or commercial agent, otherwise than as required by the
preceding section, shall incur a penalty of not more than one hundred
dollars, for which penalty the vessel shall be held liable.

Every master of a vessel in the foreign trade may engage any seaman at
any port out of the United States, in the manner provided by law, to
serve for one or more round trips from and to the port of departure, or
for a definite time, whatever the destination; and the master of a
vessel clearing from a port of the United States with one or more seamen
engaged in a foreign port as herein provided shall not be required to
reship in a port of the United States the seamen so engaged. (R. S.,
4518; June 26, 1884; sec. 20; Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 3.)


Crew list.

Before a clearance is granted to any vessel bound on a foreign voyage or
engaged in the whale-fishery, the master thereof shall deliver to the
collector of the customs a list containing the names, places of birth
and residence, and description of the persons who compose his ship's
company; to which list the oath of the captain shall be annexed, that
the list contains the names of his crew, together with the places of
their birth and residence, as far as he can ascertain them; and the
collector shall deliver him a certified copy thereof. (R. S., 4573; June
19, 1886.)

In all cases of private vessels of the United States sailing from a port
in the United States to a foreign port, the list of the crew shall be
examined by the collector for the district from which the vessel shall
clear, and if approved of by him, shall be certified accordingly. No
person shall be admitted or employed on board of any such vessel unless
his name shall have been entered in the list of the crew, approved and
certified by the collector for the district from which the vessel shall
clear. The collector, before he delivers the list of the crew, approved
and certified, to the master or proper officer of the vessel to which
the same belongs, shall cause the same to be recorded in a book by him
for that purpose to be provided, and the record shall be open for the
inspection of all persons, and a certified copy thereof shall be
admitted in evidence in any court in which any question may arise under
any of the provisions of this Title [R. S., 4501-4613.] (R. S., 4574.)


Failure to produce crew.

The master of every vessel bound on a foreign voyage or engaged in the
whale fishery shall exhibit the certified copy of the list of the crew
to the first boarding officer at the first port in the United States at
which he shall arrive on his return, and also produce the persons named
therein to the boarding officer, whose duty it shall be to examine the
men with such list and to report the same to the collector; and it shall
be the duty of the collector at the port of arrival, where the same is
different from the port from which the vessel originally sailed, to
transmit a copy of the list so reported to him to the collector of the
port from which such vessel originally sailed. For each failure to
produce any person on the certified copy of the list of the crew the
master and owner shall be severally liable to a penalty of four hundred
dollars, to be sued for, prosecuted, and disposed of in such manner as
penalties and forfeitures which may be incurred for offenses against the
laws relating to the collection of duties; but such penalties shall not
be incurred on account of the master not producing to the first boarding
officer any of the persons contained in the list who may have been
discharged in a foreign country with the consent of the consul,
vice-consul, commercial agent, or vice-commercial agent there residing,
certified in writing, under the hand and official seal, to be produced
to the collector with the other persons composing the crew, nor on
account of any such person dying or absconding or being forcibly
impressed into other service of which satisfactory proof shall also be
exhibited to the collector. (R. S., 4576; Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 3.)


Papers relating to crew.

The following rules shall be observed with reference to vessels bound on
any foreign voyage:

 _First._ The duplicate list of the ship's company, required to be made
 out by the master and delivered to the collector of the customs, under
 section forty-five hundred and seventy-three, shall be a fair copy in
 one uniform handwriting, without erasure or interlineation.

 _Second._ It shall be the duty of the owners of every such vessel to
 obtain from the collector of the customs of the district from which the
 clearance is made, a true and certified copy of the shipping-articles,
 containing the names of the crew, which shall be written in a uniform
 hand, without erasures or interlineations.

 _Third._ These documents, which shall be deemed to contain all the
 conditions of contract with the crew as to their service, pay, voyage,
 and all other things, shall be produced by the master, and laid before
 any consul, or other commercial agent of the United States, whenever he
 may deem their contents necessary to enable him to discharge the duties
 imposed upon him by law toward any mariner applying to him for his aid
 or assistance.

 _Fourth._ All interlineations, erasures, or writing in a hand different
 from that in which such duplicates were originally made, shall be
 deemed fraudulent alterations, working no change in such papers, unless
 satisfactorily explained in a manner consistent with innocent purposes
 and the provisions of law which guard the rights of mariners.

 _Fifth._ If any master of a vessel shall proceed on a foreign voyage
 without the documents herein required, or refuse to produce them when
 required, or to perform the duties imposed by this section, or shall
 violate the provisions thereof, he shall be liable to each and every
 individual injured thereby in damages, to be recovered in any court of
 the United States in the district where such delinquent may reside or
 be found, and in addition thereto be punishable by a fine of one
 hundred dollars for each offense.

 _Sixth._ It shall be the duty of the boarding-officer to report all
 violations of this section to the collector of the port where any
 vessel may arrive, and the collector shall report the same to the
 Secretary of Commerce and to the United States attorney in his
 district. (R. S., 4575; Feb. 14. 1903; sec. 10.)


Shipment of seamen in the coasting or near-by foreign trade.

None of the provisions of an act entitled "An act to authorize the
appointment of shipping commissioners by the several circuit courts of
the United States to superintend the shipping and discharge of seamen
engaged in merchant ships belonging to the United States, and for the
further protection of seamen" shall apply to sail or steam vessels
engaged in the coastwise trade, (except the coastwise trade between the
Atlantic and Pacific coasts,) or in the lake-going trade touching at
foreign ports or otherwise, or in the trade between the United States
and the British North American possessions, or in any case where the
seamen are by custom or agreement entitled to participate in the profits
or result of a cruise, or voyage. (June 9, 1874; June 19, 1886; Feb. 18,
1895.)

Shipping commissioners may ship and discharge crews for any vessel
engaged in the coastwise trade, or the trade between the United States
and the Dominion of Canada, or Newfoundland, or the West Indies, or the
Republic of Mexico, at the request of the master or owner of such
vessel, the shipping and discharging fees in such cases to be one-half
that prescribed by section forty-six hundred and twelve of the Revised
Statutes, for the purpose of determining the compensation of shipping
commissioners. (June 19, 1886; sec. 2.)

When a crew is shipped by a shipping commissioner for any American
vessel in the coastwise trade, or the trade between the United States
and the Dominion of Canada, or New Foundland, or the West Indies, or
Mexico, as authorized by section two of an Act approved June nineteenth,
eighteen hundred and eighty-six, entitled "An Act to abolish certain
fees for official services to American vessels, and to amend the laws
relating to shipping commissioners, seamen, and owners of vessels, and
for other purposes," an agreement shall be made with each seaman engaged
as one of such crew in the same manner as is provided by Sections four
thousand five hundred and eleven and four thousand five hundred and
twelve of the Revised Statutes, not however including the sixth and
eighth items of Section four thousand five hundred and eleven; and such
agreement shall be posted as provided in Section four thousand five
hundred and nineteen, and such seamen shall be discharged and receive
their wages as provided by the first clause of Section four thousand
five hundred and twenty-nine and also by Sections four thousand five
hundred and twenty-six, four thousand five hundred and twenty-seven,
four thousand five hundred and twenty-eight, four thousand five hundred
and thirty, four thousand five hundred and thirty-five, four thousand
fine hundred and thirty-six, four thousand five hundred and forty-two,
four thousand five hundred and forty-three, four thousand five hundred
and forty-four, four thousand five hundred and forty-five, four thousand
five hundred and forty-six, four thousand five hundred and forty-seven,
four thousand five hundred and forty-nine, four thousand five hundred
and fifty, four thousand five hundred and fifty-one, four thousand five
hundred and fifty-two, four thousand five hundred and fifty-three, four
thousand five hundred and fifty-four and four thousand six hundred and
two of the Revised Statutes; but in all other respects such shipments of
seamen and such shipping agreement shall be regarded as if both shipment
and agreement had been entered into between the master of a vessel and a
seaman without going before a shipping commissioner. (Feb. 18,1895; Mar.
3,1897; sec. 8; Dec. 21,1898; sec. 25; Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 8.)


Agreement in coasting trade not before commissioner.

Every master of any vessel of the burden of fifty tons or upward, bound
from a port in one State to a port in any other than an adjoining State,
except vessels of the burden of seventy-five tons or upward, bound from
a port on the Atlantic to a port on the Pacific, or vice versa, shall,
before he proceeds on such voyage, make an agreement in writing or in
print, with every seaman on board such vessel except such as shall be
apprentice or servant to himself or owners, declaring the voyage or term
of time for which such seaman shall be shipped. (R. S., 4520.)

If any master of such vessel of the burden of fifty tons or upward shall
carry out any seaman or mariner, except apprentices or servants, without
such contract or agreement being first made and signed by the seamen,
such master shall pay to every such seaman the highest price or wages
which shall have been given at the port or place where such seaman was
shipped, for a similar voyage, within three months next before the time
of such shipping, if such seaman shall perform such voyage; or if not,
then for such time as he shall continue to do duty on board such vessel;
and shall moreover be liable to a penalty of twenty dollars for every
such seaman, recoverable, one-half to the use of the person prosecuting
for the same, and the other half to the use of the United States. Any
seaman who has not signed such a contract shall not be bound by the
regulations nor subject to the penalties and forfeitures contained in
this Title [R. S., 4501-4613]. (R. S., 4521.)

At the foot of every such contract to ship upon such a vessel of the
burden of fifty tons or upward there shall be a memorandum in writing of
the day and the hour when such seamen who shipped and subscribed shall
render himself on board to begin the voyage agreed upon. If any seaman
shall neglect to render himself on board the vessel for which he has
shipped at the time mentioned in such memorandum without giving
twenty-four hours' notice of his inability to do so, and if the master
of the vessel shall, on the day in which such neglect happened, make an
entry in the log book of such vessel of the name of such seaman, and
shall in like manner note the time that he so neglected to render
himself after the time appointed, then every such seaman shall forfeit
for every hour which he shall so neglect to render himself one-half of
one day's pay, according to the rate of wages agreed upon, to be
deducted out of the wages. If any such seaman shall wholly neglect to
render himself on board of such vessel, or having rendered himself on
board shall afterwards desert, he shall forfeit all of his wages or
emoluments which he has then earned. [This section shall not apply to
fishing or whaling vessels or yachts, Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26.] (R. S.,
4522; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 2.)


Discharge in foreign trade.

All seamen discharged in the United States from merchant vessels engaged
in voyages from a port in the United States to any foreign port, or,
being of the burden of seventy-five tons or upward, from a port on the
Atlantic to a port on the Pacific, or vice versa, shall be discharged
and receive their wages in the presence of a duly authorized
shipping-commissioner under this Title [R. S., 4501-4613], except in
cases where some competent court otherwise directs; and any master or
owner of any such vessel who discharges any such seaman belonging
thereto, or pays his wages within the United States in any other manner,
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars. (R. S.,
4549.)

Every master shall, not less than forty-eight hours before paying off or
discharging any seaman, deliver to him, or, if he is to be discharged
before a shipping-commissioner, to such shipping-commissioner, a full
and true account of his wages, and all deductions to be made therefrom
on any account whatsoever; and in default shall, for each offense, be
liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars. No deduction from
the wages of any seaman except in respect of some matter happening after
such delivery shall be allowed, unless it is included in the account
delivered; and the master shall, during the voyage, enter the various
matters in respect to which such deductions are made, with the amounts
of the respective deductions as they occur, in the official log-book,
and shall, if required, produce such book at the time of the payment of
wages, and, also, upon the hearing, before any competent authority, of
any complaint or question relating to such payment. (R. S., 4550.)

Upon the discharge of any seaman, or upon payment of his wages, the
master shall sign and give him a certificate of discharge, specifying
the period of his service and the time and place of his discharge, in
the form marked Table B in the schedule annexed to this Title [R. S.,
4501-4613]; and every master who fails to sign and give to such seaman
such certificate and discharge, shall, for each such offense, incur a
penalty not exceeding fifty dollars. But whenever the master shall
discharge his crew or any part thereof in any collection-district where
no shipping-commissioner has been appointed, he may perform for himself
the duties of such commissioner. (R. S., 4551.)


Discharge in foreign ports.

Upon the application of the master of any vessel to a consular officer
to discharge a seaman, or upon the application of any seaman for his own
discharge, if it appears to such officer that said seaman has completed
his shipping agreement, or is entitled to his discharge under any act of
Congress or according to the general principles or usages of maritime
law as recognized in the United States, such officer shall discharge
said seaman, and require from the master of said vessel, before such
discharge shall be made, payment of the wages which may then be due said
seaman; but no payment of extra wages shall be required by any consular
officer upon such discharge of any seaman except as provided in this
act. (R. S., 4580; June 26, 1884; sec. 2.)

If any consular officer, when discharging any seaman, shall neglect to
require the payment of and collect the arrears of wages and extra wages
required to be paid in the case of the discharge of any seaman, he shall
be accountable to the United States for the full amount thereof. The
master shall provide any seaman so discharged with employment on a
vessel agreed to by the seaman, or shall provide him with one month's
extra wages, if it shall be shown to the satisfaction of the consul that
such seaman was not discharged for neglect of duty, incompetency, or
injury incurred on the vessel. If the seaman is discharged by voluntary
consent before the consul, he shall be entitled to his wages up to the
time of his discharge, but not for any further period. If the seaman is
discharged on account of injury or illness, incapacitating him for
service, the expenses of his maintenance and return to the United States
shall be paid from the fund for the maintenance and transportation of
destitute American seamen: _Provided_, That at the discretion of the
Secretary of Commerce, and under such regulations as he may prescribe,
if any seaman incapacitated from service by injury or illness is on
board a vessel so situated that a prompt discharge requiring the
personal appearance of the master of the vessel before an American
consul or consular agent is impracticable, such seaman may be sent to a
consul or consular agent, who shall care for him and defray the cost of
his maintenance and transportation, as provided in this paragraph. (R.
S., 4581; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 16; Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 19.) (Effective
beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)

Whenever a vessel of the United States is sold in a foreign country and
her company discharged, it shall be the duty of the master to produce to
the consular officer a certified list of the ship's company, and also
the shipping articles, and besides paying to each seaman or apprentice
the wages due him, he shall either provide him with adequate employment
on board some other vessel bound to the port at which he was originally
shipped, or to such other port as may be agreed upon by him, or furnish
the means of sending him to such port, or provide him with a passage
home, or deposit with the consular officer such a sum of money as is by
the officer deemed sufficient to defray the expenses of his maintenance
and passage home; and the consular officer shall indorse upon the
agreement with the crew of the ship which the seaman or apprentice is
leaving the particulars of any payment, provision, or deposit made under
this section. A failure to comply with the provisions of this section
shall render the owner liable to a fine of not exceeding fifty dollars.
(R. S., 4582, Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 17.)

Whenever on the discharge of a seaman in a foreign country by a consular
officer on his complaint that the voyage is continued contrary to
agreement, or that the vessel is badly provisioned or unseaworthy, or
against the officers for cruel treatment, it shall be the duty of the
consul or consular agent to institute a proper inquiry into the matter,
and, upon his being satisfied of the truth and justice of such
complaint, he shall require the master to pay to such seaman one month's
wages over and above the wages due at the time of discharge, and to
provide him with adequate employment on board some other vessel, or
provide him with a passage on board some other vessel bound to the port
from which he was originally shipped, or to the most convenient port of
entry in the United States, or to a port agreed to by the seaman. (R.
S., 4583; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 18.)


Wages.

No seaman shall, by any agreement other than is provided by this Title
[R. S., 4501-4613], forfeit his lien upon the ship, or be deprived of
any remedy for the recovery of his wages to which he would otherwise
have been entitled; and every stipulation in any agreement inconsistent
with any provision of this Title, and every stipulation by which any
seaman consents to abandon his right to his wages in the case of the
loss of the ship, or to abandon any right which he may have or obtain in
the nature of salvage, shall be wholly inoperative. (R. S., 4535.)

The following rules shall be observed with respect to the settlement of
wages:

 _First._ Upon the completion, before a shipping-commissioner, of any
 discharge and settlement, the master or owner and each seaman,
 respectively, in the presence of the shipping-commissioner, shall sign
 a mutual release of all claims for wages in respect of the past voyage
 or engagement, and the shipping-commissioner shall also sign and attest
 it, and shall retain it in a book to be kept for that purpose, provided
 both the master and seaman assent to such settlement, or the settlement
 has been adjusted by the shipping-commissioner.

 _Second._ Such release, so signed and attested, shall operate as a
 mutual discharge and settlement of all demands for wages between the
 parties thereto, on account of wages, in respect to the past voyage or
 engagement.

 _Third._ A copy of such release, certified under the hand and seal of
 such shipping-commissioner to be a true copy, shall be given by him to
 any party thereto requiring the same, and such copy shall be receivable
 in evidence upon any future question touching such claims, and shall
 have all the effect of the original of which it purports to be a copy.

 _Fourth._ In cases in which discharge and settlement before a
 shipping-commissioner are required, no payment, receipt, settlement, or
 discharge otherwise made shall operate as evidence of the release or
 satisfaction of any claim.

 _Fifth._ Upon payment being made by a master before a
 shipping-commissioner, the shipping-commissioner shall, if required,
 sign and give to such master a statement of the whole amount so paid;
 and such statement shall, between the master and his employer, be
 received as evidence that he has made the payments therein mentioned.
 (R. S., 4552.)

Upon every discharge effected before a shipping-commissioner, the master
shall make and sign, in the form given in the table marked "B," in the
schedule annexed to this Title [R. S., 4501-4613], a report of the
conduct, character, and qualifications of the persons discharged; or may
state in such form, that he declines to give any opinion upon such
particulars, or upon any of them; and the commissioner shall keep a
register of the same, and shall, if desired so to do by any seaman, give
to him or indorse on his certificate of discharge a copy of so much of
such report as concerns him. (R. S., 4553.)

A seaman's right to wages and provisions shall be taken to commence
either at the time at which he commences work, or at the time specified
in the agreement for his commencement of work or presence on board,
whichever first happens. (R. S., 4524.)

No right to wages shall be dependent on the earning of freight by the
vessel; but every seaman or apprentice who would be entitled to demand
and receive any wages if the vessel on which he has served had earned
freight, shall, subject to all other rules of law and conditions
applicable to the case, be entitled to claim and recover the same of the
master or owner in personam, notwithstanding that freight has not been
earned. But in all cases of wreck or loss of vessel, proof that any
seaman or apprentice has not exerted himself to the utmost to save the
vessel, cargo, and stores, shall bar his claim. (R. S., 4525.)

In cases where the service of any seaman terminates before the period
contemplated in the agreement, by reason of the loss or wreck of the
vessel, such seaman shall be entitled to wages for the time of service
prior to such termination, but not for any further period. Such seaman
shall be considered as a destitute seaman and shall be treated and
transported to port of shipment as provided in sections forty-five
hundred and seventy-seven, forty-five hundred and seventy-eight, and
forty-five hundred and seventy-nine of the Revised Statutes of the
United States. [This section shall not apply to fishing or whaling
vessels or yachts—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26.] (R. S., 4526; Dec. 21, 1898;
sec. 3.)

Any seaman who has signed an agreement and is afterward discharged
before the commencement of the voyage or before one month's wages are
earned, without fault on his part justifying such discharge, and without
his consent, shall be entitled to receive from the master or owner, in
addition to any wages he may have earned, a sum equal in amount to one
month's wages as compensation, and may, on adducing evidence
satisfactory to the court hearing the case, of having been improperly
discharged, recover such compensation as if it were wages duly earned.
(R. S., 4527.)

No seaman or apprentice shall be entitled to wages for any period during
which he unlawfully refuses or neglects to work when required, after the
time fixed by the agreement for him to begin work, nor, unless the court
hearing the case otherwise directs, for any period during which he is
lawfully imprisoned for any offense committed by him. (R. S., 4528.)

The master or owner or any vessel making coasting voyages shall pay to
every seaman his wages within two days after the termination of the
agreement under which he was shipped, or at the time such seaman is
discharged, whichever first happens; and in case of vessels making
foreign voyages, or from a port on the Atlantic to a port on the
Pacific, or vice versa, within twenty-four hours after the cargo has
been discharged, or within four days after the seaman has been
discharged, whichever first happens; and in all cases the seaman shall
be entitled to be paid at the time of his discharge on account of wages
a sum equal to one-third part of the balance due him. Every master or
owner who refuses or neglects to make payment in the manner hereinbefore
mentioned without sufficient cause shall pay to the seaman a sum equal
to two days' pay for each and every day during which payment is delayed
beyond the respective periods, which sum shall be recoverable as wages
in any claim made before the court; but this section shall not apply to
masters or owners of any vessel the seamen of which are entitled to
share in the profits of the cruise or voyage. [This section shall not
apply to fishing or whaling vessels or yachts—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26—but
this section shall apply to all vessels engaged in the taking of
oysters—June 28, 1906, sec. 4.] (R. S. 4529; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 4; June
28, 1906; sec. 4. Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 3.) (Effective beginning Nov. 4,
1915.)

Every seaman on a vessel of the United States shall be entitled to
receive on demand from the master of the vessel to which he belongs
one-half part of the wages which he shall have then earned at every port
where such vessel, after the voyage has been commenced, shall load or
deliver cargo before the voyage is ended and all stipulations in the
contract to the contrary shall be void: _Provided_, Such a demand shall
not be made before the expiration of, nor oftener than once in five
days. Any failure on the part of the master to comply with this demand
shall release the seaman from his contract and he shall be entitled to
full payment of wages earned. And when the voyage is ended every such
seaman shall be entitled to the remainder of the wages which shall then
be due him, as provided in section forty-five hundred and twenty-nine of
the Revised Statutes: _Provided further_, That notwithstanding any
release signed by any seaman under section forty-five hundred and
fifty-two of the Revised Statutes any court having jurisdiction may upon
good cause shown set aside such release and take such action as justice
shall require: _And provided further_, That this section shall apply to
seamen on foreign vessels while in harbors of the United States, and the
courts of the United States shall be open to such seamen for its
enforcement. [This section shall not apply to fishing or whaling vessels
or yachts—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26.] (R. S., 4530; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 5;
Mar. 4, 1915, sec. 4.) (Effective on American vessels beginning Nov. 4,
1915; on vessels of foreign nations not covered by treaties Mar. 4,
1916; on vessels of other foreign nations after termination of treaties.)

Whenever the wages of any seaman are not paid within ten days after the
time when the same ought to be paid according to the provisions of this
Title [R. S., 4501-4613], or any dispute arises between the master and
seamen touching wages, the district judge for the judicial district
where the vessel is, or in case his residence be more than three miles
from the place, or he be absent from the place of his residence, then,
any judge or justice of the peace, or any commissioner of a district
court, may summon the master of such vessel to appear before him, to
show cause why process should not issue against such vessel, her tackle,
apparel, and furniture, according to the course of admiralty courts, to
answer for the wages. (R. S., 4546; May 28, 1896.)

If the master against whom such summons is issued neglects to appear,
or, appearing, does not show that the wages are paid or otherwise
satisfied or forfeited, and if the matter in dispute is not forthwith
settled, the judge or justice or commissioner shall certify to the clerk
of the district court that there is sufficient cause of complaint
whereon to found admiralty process; and thereupon the clerk of such
court shall issue process against the vessel. In all cases where the
matter in demand does not exceed one hundred dollars the return day of
the monition or citation shall be the first day of a stated or special
session of court next succeeding the third day after the service of the
monition or citation, and on the return of process in open court, duly
served, either party may proceed therein to proofs and hearing without
other notice, and final judgment shall be given according to the usual
course of admiralty courts in such cases. In such suits all the seamen
having cause of complaint of the like kind against the same vessel may
be joined as complainants, and it shall be incumbent on the master to
produce the contract and log book, if required to ascertain any matter
in dispute; otherwise the complainants shall be permitted to state the
contents thereof, and the burden of proof of the contrary shall be on
the master. But nothing herein contained shall prevent any seaman from
maintaining any action at common law for the recovery of his wages, or
having immediate process out of any court having admiralty jurisdiction
wherever any vessel may be found, in case she shall have left the port
of delivery where her voyage ended before payment of the wages, or in
case she shall be about to proceed to sea before the end of the ten days
next after the day when such wages are due, in accordance with section
forty-five hundred and twenty-nine of the Revised Statutes. [This
section shall not apply to fishing or whaling vessels or yachts—Dec. 21,
1898, sec. 26—but this section shall apply to all vessels engaged in the
taking of oysters—June 28, 1906, sec. 4.] (R. S., 4547; Dec. 21, 1898;
sec. 6; June 28, 1906; sec. 4.)

Moneys paid under the laws of the United States, by direction of
consular officers or agents, at any foreign port or place, as wages,
extra or otherwise, due American seamen, shall be paid in gold or its
equivalent, without any deduction whatever any contract to the contrary
notwithstanding. (R. S., 4548.)

Any question concerning the forfeiture of, or deductions from, the wages
of any seaman or apprentice, may be determined in any proceeding
lawfully instituted with respect to such wages, notwithstanding the
offense in respect of which such question arises, though hereby made
punishable by imprisonment as well as forfeiture, has not been made the
subject of any criminal proceeding. (R. S., 4603.)

Whenever in any proceeding relating to seamen's wages it is shown that
any seaman or apprentice has, in the course of the voyage, been
convicted of any offense by any competent tribunal, and rightfully
punished therefor, by imprisonment or otherwise, the court hearing the
case may direct a part of the wages due to such seaman not exceeding
fifteen dollars, to be applied in reimbursing any costs properly
incurred by the master in procuring such conviction and punishment. (R.
S., 4605.)


Advances and allotments of wages.

 (_a_) It shall be, and is hereby, made unlawful in any case to pay any
 seaman wages in advance of the time when he has actually earned the
 same, or to pay such advance wages, or to make any order, or note, or
 other evidence of indebtedness therefor to any other person, or to pay
 any person, for the shipment of seamen when payment is deducted or to
 be deducted from a seaman's wages. Any person violating any of the
 foregoing provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
 misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not
 less than $25 nor more than $100, and may also be imprisoned for a
 period of not exceeding six months, at the discretion of the court. The
 payment of such advance wages or allotment shall in no case except as
 herein provided absolve the vessel or the master or the owner thereof
 from the full payment of wages after the same shall have been actually
 earned, and shall be no defense to a libel suit or action of the
 recovery of such wages. If any person shall demand or receive, either
 directly or indirectly, from any seaman or other person seeking
 employment, as seaman, or from any person on his behalf, any
 remuneration whatever for providing him with employment, he shall for
 every such offense be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
 imprisoned not more than six months or fined not more than $500.

 (_b_) It shall be lawful for any seaman to stipulate in his shipping
 agreement for an allotment of any portion of the wages he may earn to
 his grandparents, parents, wife, sister, or children.

 (_c_) No allotment shall be valid unless in writing and signed by and
 approved by the shipping-commissioner. It shall be the duty of the said
 commissioner to examine such allotments and the parties to them and
 enforce compliance with the law. All stipulations for the allotment of
 any part of the wages of a seaman during his absence which are made at
 the commencement of the voyage shall be inserted in the agreement and
 shall state the amounts and times of the payments to be made and the
 persons to whom the payments are to be made.

 (_d_) No allotment except as provided for in this section shall be
 lawful. Any person who shall falsely claim to be such relation, as
 above described, of a seaman under this section shall for every such
 offense be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not
 exceeding six months, at the discretion of the court.

 (_e_) This section shall apply as well to foreign vessels while in
 waters of the United States, as to vessels of the United States, and
 any master, owner, consignee, or agent of any foreign vessel who has
 violated its provisions shall be liable to the same penalty that the
 master, owner, or agent of a vessel of the United States would be for
 similar violation.

 The master, owner, consignee, or agent of any vessel of the United
 States, or of any foreign vessel seeking clearance from a port of the
 United States, shall present his shipping articles at the office of
 clearance, and no clearance shall be granted any such vessel unless the
 provisions of this section have been complied with.

 (_f_) Under the direction of the Secretary of Commerce the Commissioner
 of Navigation shall make regulations to carry out this section. [This
 section shall not apply to fishing or whaling vessels or yachts—Dec.
 21, 1898, sec. 26—but this section shall apply to all vessels engaged
 in the taking of oysters—June 28, 1906, sec. 4.] (Dec. 21, 1898; sec.
 24; Apr. 26, 1904; June 28, 1906; sec. 4; Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 11.)
 (Effective on American vessels beginning Nov. 4, 1915; on vessels of
 foreign nations not covered by treaties Mar. 4, 1916; on vessels of
 other foreign nations after termination of treaties.)


Wages and clothing exempt from attachment.

No wages due or accruing to any seaman or apprentice shall be subject to
attachment or arrestment from any court, and every payment of wages to a
seaman or apprentice shall be valid in law, notwithstanding any previous
sale or assignment of wages or of any attachment, encumbrance, or
arrestment thereon; and no assignment or sale of wages or of salvage
made prior to the accruing thereof shall bind the party making the same,
except such allotments as are authorized by this title. This section
shall apply to fishermen employed on fishing vessels as well as to
seamen: _Provided_, That nothing contained in this or any preceding
section shall interfere with the order by any court regarding the
payment by any seaman of any part of his wages for the support and
maintenance of his wife and minor children. (Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 12.)
(Effective beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)

The clothing of any seaman shall be exempt from attachment, and any
person who shall detain such clothing when demanded by the owner shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be imprisoned not more than
six months or fined not more than five hundred dollars, or both. (Feb.
18, 1895; Apr. 11, 1904.)

No sum exceeding one dollar shall be recoverable from any seaman, by any
one person, for any debt contracted during the time such seaman shall
actually belong to any vessel, until the voyage for which such seaman
engaged shall be ended. (R. S., 4537.)


Desertion of seamen abroad.

It shall be the duty of all consular officers to discountenance
insubordination by every means in their power and, where the local
authorities can be usefully employed for that purpose, to lend their aid
and use their exertions to that end in the most effectual manner. In all
cases where seamen or officers are accused, the consular officer shall
inquire into the facts and proceed as provided in section forty-five
hundred and eighty-three of the Revised Statutes; and the officer
discharging such seaman shall enter upon the crew list and shipping
articles and official log the cause of such discharge and the
particulars in which the cruel or unusual treatment consisted and
subscribe his name thereto officially. He shall read the entry made in
the official log to the master, and his reply thereto, if any, shall
likewise be entered and subscribed in the same manner. (R. S., 4600;
Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 21; Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 8.) (Effective beginning Nov.
4, 1915.)


Desertion of foreign seamen in the United States.

On application of a consul or vice-consul of any foreign government
having a treaty with the United States stipulating for the restoration
of seamen deserting, made in writing, stating that the person therein
named has deserted from a vessel of any such government, while in any
port of the United States, and on proof by the exhibition of the
register of the vessel, ship's roll, or other official document, that
the person named belonged, at the time of desertion, to the crew of such
vessel, it shall be the duty of any court, judge, commissioner of any
circuit court, justice, or other magistrate, having competent power, to
issue warrants to cause such person to be arrested for examination. If,
on examination, the facts stated are found to be true, the person
arrested not being a citizen of the United States, shall be delivered up
to the consul or vice-consul, to be sent back to the dominions of any
such government, or, on the request and at the expense of the consul or
vice-consul, shall be detained until the consul or vice-consul finds an
opportunity to send him back to the dominions of any such government. No
person so arrested shall be detained more than two months after his
arrest; but at the end of that time shall be set at liberty, and shall
not be again molested for the same cause. If any such deserter shall be
found to have committed any crime or offense, his surrender may be
delayed until the tribunal before which the case shall be depending, or
may be cognizable, shall have pronounced its sentence, and such sentence
shall have been carried into effect. (R. S., 5280.)


Repeal of treaties and conventions.

In the judgment of Congress articles in treaties and conventions of the
United States, in so far as they provide for the arrest and imprisonment
of officers and seamen deserting or charged with desertion from merchant
vessels of the United States in foreign countries, and for the arrest
and imprisonment of officers and seamen deserting or charged with
desertion from merchant vessels of foreign nations in the United States
and the Territories and possessions thereof, and for the cooperation,
aid, and protection of competent legal authorities in effecting such
arrest or imprisonment and any other treaty provision in conflict with
the provisions of this Act, ought to be terminated, and to this end the
President be, and he is hereby, requested and directed, within ninety
days after the passage of this Act, to give notice to the several
Governments, respectively, that so much as hereinbefore described of all
such treaties and conventions between the United States and foreign
Governments will terminate on the expiration of such periods after
notices have been given as may be required in such treaties and
conventions. (Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 16.)

Upon the expiration after notice of the periods required, respectively,
by said treaties and conventions and of one year in the case of the
independent State of the Kongo, so much as hereinbefore described in
each and every one of said articles shall be deemed and held to have
expired and to be of no force and effect, and thereupon section
fifty-two hundred and eighty and so much of section four thousand and
eighty-one of the Revised Statutes as relates to the arrest or
imprisonment of officers and seamen deserting or charged with desertion
from merchant vessels of foreign nations in the United States and
Territories and possessions thereof, and for the cooperation, aid, and
protection of competent legal authorities in effecting such arrest or
imprisonment, shall be, and is hereby, repealed. (Sec. 17.)


Arbitration before shipping commissioner.

Every shipping-commissioner shall hear and decide any question
whatsoever between a master, consignee, agent, or owner, and any of his
crew, which both parties agree in writing to submit to him; and every
award so made by him shall be binding on both parties, and shall, in any
legal proceedings which may be taken in the matter, before any court of
justice, be deemed to be conclusive as to the rights of parties. And any
document under the hand and official seal of a commissioner purporting
to be such submission or award, shall be prima-facie evidence thereof.
(R. S., 4554; Aug. 19, 1890.)

In any proceeding relating to the wages, claims, or discharge of a
seaman, carried on before any shipping-commissioner, under the
provisions of this Title [R. S., 4501-4613], such shipping-commissioner
may call upon the owner, or his agent, or upon the master, or any mate,
or any other member of the crew, to produce any log-books, papers, or
other documents in their possession or power, respectively, relating to
any matter in question in such proceedings, and may call before him and
examine any of such persons, being then at or near the place, on any
such matter; and every owner, agent, master, mate, or other member of
the crew who, when called upon by the shipping-commissioner, does not
produce any such books, papers, or documents, if in his possession or
power, or does not appear and give evidence, shall, unless he shows some
reasonable cause for such a default, be liable to a penalty of not more
than one hundred dollars for each offense; and, on application made by
the shipping-commissioner, shall be further punished, in the discretion
of the court, as in other cases of contempt of the process of the court.
(R. S., 4555.)


Soliciting lodgers.

If, within twenty-four hours after the arrival of any vessel at any port
in the United States, any person, then being on board such vessel,
solicits any seaman to become a lodger at the house of any person
letting lodgings for hire, or takes out of such vessel any effects of
any seaman, except under his personal direction, and with the permission
of the master, he shall, for every such offense, be punishable by a fine
of not more than fifty dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than
three months. This section shall apply to vessels of the United States
engaged in the foreign trade and to foreign vessels. (R. S., 4607; Apr.
13, 1904.)


Return of seamen from foreign ports, Alaska, and insular ports.

It shall be the duty of the consuls, vice-consuls, commercial agents,
and vice-commercial agents, from time to time, to provide for the seamen
of the United States, who may be found destitute within their districts,
respectively, sufficient subsistence and passages to some port in the
United States, in the most reasonable manner, at the expense of the
United States, subject to such instructions as the Secretary of State
shall give. The seamen shall, if able, be bound to do duty on board the
vessels in which they may be transported, according to their several
abilities. (R. S., 4577.)

Relief and protection of American seamen in foreign countries, and
shipwrecked American seamen in the Territory of Alaska, in the Hawaiian
Islands, Porto Rico, the Panama Canal Zone, and the Philippine Islands,
$20,000. (Mar. 4, 1915.)

All masters of vessels of the United States, and bound to some port of
the same, are required to take such destitute seamen on board their
vessels, at the request of consular officers, and to transport them to
the port in the United States to which such vessel may be bound, on such
terms, not exceeding ten dollars for each person for voyages of not more
than thirty days, and not exceeding twenty dollars for each person for
longer voyages, as may be agreed between the master and the consular
officer, when the transportation is by a sailing vessel; and the regular
steerage passenger rate not to exceed two cents per mile when the
transportation is by steamer; and said consular officer shall issue
certificates for such transportation, which certificates shall be
assignable for collection. If any such destitute seaman is so disabled
or ill as to be unable to perform duty, the consular officer shall so
certify in the certificate of transportation, and such additional
compensation shall be paid as the Comptroller of the Treasury shall deem
proper. Every such master who refuses to receive and transport such
seamen on the request or order of such consular officer shall be liable
to the United States in a penalty of one hundred dollars for each seaman
so refused. The certificate of any such consular officer, given under
his hand and official seal, shall be presumptive evidence of such
refusal in any court of law having jurisdiction for the recovery of the
penalty. No master of any vessel shall, however, be obliged to take a
greater number than one man to every one hundred tons burden of the
vessel on any one voyage, or to take any seaman having a contagious
disease. (R. S., 4578; June 26, 1884; sec. 9; June 19, 1886; sec. 18.)

Whenever distressed seamen of the United States are transported from
foreign ports where there is no consular officer of the United States,
to ports of the United States, there shall be allowed to the master or
owner of each vessel, in which they are transported, such reasonable
compensation, in addition to the allowance now fixed by law, as shall be
deemed equitable by the Comptroller of the Treasury. (R. S., 4579.)


Effects of deceased seamen.

Whenever any seaman or apprentice belonging to or sent home on any
merchant vessel, whether a foreign-going or domestic vessel, employed on
a voyage which is to terminate in the United States, dies during such
voyage, the master shall take charge of all moneys, clothes, and effects
which he leaves on board, and shall, if he thinks fit, cause all or any
of such clothes and effects to be sold by auction at the mast or other
public auction, and shall thereupon sign an entry in the official
log-book, and cause it to be attested by the mate and one of the crew,
containing the following particulars:

 _First._ A statement of the amount of money so left by the deceased.

 _Second._ In case of a sale, a description of each article sold, and
 the sum received for each.

 _Third._ A statement of the sum due to deceased as wages, and the total
 amount of deductions, if any, to be made therefrom. (R. S., 4538.)

In cases embraced by the preceding section, the following rules
shall be observed:

 _First._ If the vessel proceeds at once to any port in the United
 States, the master shall, within forty-eight hours after his arrival,
 deliver any such effects remaining unsold, and pay any money which he
 has taken charge of, or received from such sale, and the balance of
 wages due to the deceased, to the shipping-commissioner at the port of
 destination in the United States.

 _Second._ If the vessel touches and remains at some foreign port before
 coming to any port in the United States, the master shall report the
 case to the United States consular officer there, and shall give to
 such officer any information he requires as to the destination of the
 vessel and probable length of the voyage; and such officer may, if he
 considers it expedient so to do, require the effects, money, and wages
 to be delivered and paid to him, and shall, upon such delivery and
 payment, give to the master a receipt; and the master shall within
 forty-eight hours after his arrival at his port of destination in the
 United States produce the same to the shipping-commissioner there. Such
 consular officer shall, in any such case, indorse and certify upon the
 agreement with the crew the particulars with respect to such delivery
 and payment.

 _Third._ If the consular officer does not require such payment and
 delivery to be made to him, the master shall take charge of the
 effects, money, and wages, and shall, within forty-eight hours after
 his arrival at his port of destination in the United States, deliver
 and pay the same to the shipping-commissioner there.

 _Fourth._ The master shall, in all cases in which any seaman or
 apprentice dies during the voyage or engagement, give to such officer
 or shipping-commissioner an account, in such form as they may
 respectively require, of the effects, money, and wages so to be
 delivered and paid; and no deductions claimed in such account shall be
 allowed unless verified by an entry in the official log-book, if there
 be any; and by such other vouchers, if any, as may be reasonably
 required by the officer or shipping-commissioner to whom the account is
 rendered.

 _Fifth._ Upon due compliance with such of the provisions of this
 section as relate to acts to be done at the port of destination in the
 United States, the shipping-commissioner shall grant to the master a
 certificate to that effect. No officer of customs shall clear any
 foreign-going vessel without the production of such certificate. (R.
 S., 4539.)

Whenever any master fails to take such charge of the money or other
effects of a seaman or apprentice during a voyage, or to make such
entries in respect thereof, or to procure such attestation to such
entries, or to make such payment or delivery of any money, wages, or
effects of any seaman or apprentice dying during a voyage, or to give
such account in respect thereof as is above directed, he shall be
accountable for the money, wages, and effects of the seaman or
apprentice to the district court in whose jurisdiction such port of
destination is situate, and shall pay and deliver the same accordingly;
and he shall, in addition, for every such offense, be liable to a
penalty of not more than treble the value of the money or effects, or,
if such value is not ascertained, not more than two hundred dollars; and
if any such money, wages, or effects are not duly paid, delivered and
accounted for by the master, the owner of the vessel shall pay, deliver,
and account for the same, and such money and wages and the value of such
effects shall be recoverable from him accordingly; and if he fails to
account for and pay the same, he shall, in addition to his liability for
the money and value, be liable to the same penalty which is incurred by
the master for a like offense; and all money, wages, and effects of any
seaman or apprentice dying during a voyage shall be recoverable in the
courts and by the modes of proceeding by which seaman are enabled to
recover wages due to them. (R. S., 4540.)

Whenever any such seaman or apprentice dies at any place out of the
United States, leaving any money or effects not on board of his vessel,
the consular officer of the United States at or nearest the place shall
claim and take charge of such money and effects, and shall, if he thinks
fit, sell all or any of such effects, or any effects of any deceased
seaman or apprentice delivered to him under the provisions of this Title
[R. S., 4501-4613], and shall quarterly remit to the district court for
the district embracing the port from which such vessel sailed, or the
port where the voyage terminates, all moneys belonging to or arising
from the sale of the effects or paid as the wages of any deceased seamen
or apprentices which have come to his hands; and shall render such
accounts thereof as the circuit court requires. (R. S., 4541; Mar. 3,
1897; sec. 4.)

Whenever any seaman or apprentice dies in the United States, and is, at
the time of his death, entitled to claim from the master or owner of any
vessel in which he has served, any unpaid wages or effects, such master
or owner shall pay and deliver, or account for the same, to the
shipping-commissioner at the port where the seaman or apprentice was
discharged, or was to have been discharged, or where he died. (R. S.,
4542; Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 6.)

Every shipping-commissioner in the United States shall, within one week
from the date of receiving any such money, wages, or effects of any
deceased seaman or apprentice, pay, remit, or deliver to the district
court of the district in which he resides, the money, wages, or effects,
subject to such deductions as may be allowed by the district court for
expenses incurred in respect to such money and effects; and should any
commissioner fail to pay, remit, and deliver the same to the district
court, within the time hereinbefore mentioned, he shall incur a penalty
of not more than treble the value of such money and effects. (R. S.,
4543.)

If the money and effects of any seaman or apprentice paid, remitted, or
delivered to the district court, including the moneys received for any
part of his effects which have been sold, either before delivery to the
district court, or by its directions, do not exceed in value the sum of
three hundred dollars, then, subject to the provisions hereinafter
contained, and to all such deductions for expenses incurred in respect
to the seaman or apprentice, or of his money and effects, as the said
court thinks fit to allow, the court may pay and deliver the said money
and effects to any claimants who can prove themselves either to be his
widow or children, or to be entitled to the effects of the deceased
under his will, or under any statute, or at common law, or to be
entitled to procure probate, or take out letters of administration or
confirmation, although no probate or letters of administration or
confirmation have been taken out, and shall be thereby discharged from
all further liability in respect of the money and effects so paid and
delivered; or may, if he thinks fit so to do, require probate, or
letters of administration or confirmation, to be taken out, and
thereupon pay and deliver the said money and effects to the legal
personal representatives of the deceased; and if such money and effects
exceed in value the sum of three hundred dollars, then, subject to
deduction for expenses, the court shall pay and deliver the same to the
legal personal representatives of the deceased. (R. S., 4544.)

A district court, in its discretion, may at any time direct the sale of
the whole or any part of the effects of a deceased seaman or apprentice,
which it has received or may hereafter receive, and shall hold the
proceeds of such sale as the wages of deceased seamen are held. When no
claim to the wages or effects or proceeds of the sale of the effects of
a deceased seaman or apprentice, received by a district court, is
substantiated within six years after the receipt thereof by the court,
it shall be in the absolute discretion of the court, if any subsequent
claim is made, either to allow or refuse the same. Such courts shall,
from time to time, pay any moneys arising from the unclaimed wages and
effects of deceased seamen, which in their opinion it is not necessary
to retain for the purpose of satisfying claims, into the Treasury of the
United States, and such moneys shall form a fund for, and be
appropriated to, the relief of sick and disabled and destitute seamen
belonging to the United States merchant marine service. (R. S., 4545;
Mar. 3, 1897; sec. 7.)


Sick and disabled seamen.

The President is authorized to receive donations of real or personal
property, in the name of the United States, for the erection or support
of hospitals for sick and disabled seamen. (R. S., 4801.)

The term "seaman," wherever employed in legislation relating to the
marine-hospital service, shall be held to include any person employed on
board in the care, preservation, or navigation of any vessel, or in the
service, on board, of those engaged in such care, preservation, or
navigation. (Mar. 3, 1875; sec. 3.)

No person employed in or connected with the navigation, management, or
use of canal-boats engaged in the coasting-trade shall by reason thereof
be entitled to any benefit or relief from the marine-hospital fund. (R.
S., 4804.)

Sick and disabled seamen of foreign vessels and of vessels [not subject
to hospital-dues] may be cared for by the marine-hospital service at
such rates and under such regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury
may prescribe. (Mar. 3, 1875; sec. 6.)

Sick foreign seamen may be admitted to the marine hospitals within the
United States, if it can with convenience be done, on the application of
the master of any foreign vessel to which any such seaman may belong.
Each seaman so admitted shall be subject to a charge of [seventy-five
cents] per day for each day he may remain in the hospital, which shall
be paid by the master of such foreign vessel to the collector of the
collection-district in which such hospital is situated. And the
collector shall not grant a clearance to any foreign vessel until the
money so due from her master shall be paid. The officer in charge of
each hospital is hereby directed, under penalty of fifty dollars, to
make out the accounts against each foreign seaman that may be placed in
the hospital under his direction, and render the same to the collector.
(R. S., 4805; Mar. 3, 1875; sec. 6.)

Insane patients of said [marine hospital] service shall be admitted into
the Government Hospital for the Insane upon the order of the Secretary
of the Treasury, and shall be cared for therein until cured or until
removed by the same authority; and the charge for each such patient
shall not exceed four dollars and fifty cents a week, which charge shall
be paid out of the marine-hospital fund. (Mar. 3, 1875; sec. 5.)

The privilege of admission to and temporary treatment in the marine
hospitals under the control of the Government of the United States be,
and is hereby, extended to the keepers and crews of the Life-Saving
Service under the same rules and regulations as those governing sailors
and seamen, and for the purposes of this Act members of the Life-Saving
Service shall be received in said hospitals and treated therein, and at
the dispensaries thereof, as are seamen of American registered vessels;
but this Act shall not be so construed as to compel the establishment of
hospitals or dispensaries for the benefit of said keepers and crews, nor
as establishing a home for the same when permanently disabled. (Aug. 4,
1894.)


Jurisdiction over American seamen in foreign ports and foreign seamen in
American ports.

Whenever it is stipulated by treaty or convention between the United
States and any foreign nation that the consul-general, consuls,
vice-consuls, or consular or commercial agents of each nation, shall
have exclusive jurisdiction of controversies, difficulties, or disorders
arising at sea or in the waters or ports of the other nation, between
the master or officers and any of the crew, or between any of the crew
themselves, of any vessel belonging to the nation represented by such
consular officer, such stipulations shall be executed and enforced
within the jurisdiction of the United States as hereinafter declared.
But before this section shall take effect as to the vessels of any
particular nation having such treaty with the United States, the
President shall be satisfied that similar provisions have been made for
the execution of such treaty by the other contracting party, and shall
issue his proclamation to that effect, declaring this section to be in
force as to such nation. (R. S., 4079.)

In all cases within the purview of the preceding section the
consul-general, consul, or other consular or commercial authority of
such foreign nation charged with the appropriate duty in the particular
case, may make application to any court of record of the United States,
or to any judge thereof, or to any commissioner of a district court,
setting forth that such controversy, difficulty, or disorder has arisen,
briefly stating the nature thereof, and when and where the same
occurred, and exhibiting a certified copy or abstract of the
shipping-articles, roll, or other proper paper of the vessel, to the
effect that the person in question is of the crew or ship's company of
such vessel; and further stating and certifying that such person has
withdrawn himself, or is believed to be about to withdraw himself, from
the control and discipline of the master and officers of the vessel, or
that he has refused, or is about to refuse, to submit to and obey the
lawful jurisdiction of such consular or commercial authority in the
premises; and further stating and certifying that, to the best of the
knowledge and belief of the officer certifying, such person is not a
citizen of the United States. Such application shall be in writing and
duly authenticated by the consular or other sufficient official seal.
Thereupon such court, judge, or commissioner shall issue his warrant for
the arrest of the person so complained of, directed to the marshal of
the United States for the appropriate district, or in his discretion to
any person, being a citizen of the United States, whom he may specially
depute for the purpose, requiring such person to be brought before him
for examination at a certain time and place. (R. S., 4080; May 28, 1896.)

If, on such examination, it is made to appear that the person so
arrested is a citizen of the United States, he shall be forthwith
discharged from arrest, and shall be left to the ordinary course of law.
But if this is not made to appear, and such court, judge, or
commissioner finds, upon the papers hereinbefore referred to, a
sufficient prima-facie case that the matter concerns only the internal
order and discipline of such foreign vessels, or, whether in its nature
civil or criminal, does not affect directly the execution of the laws of
the United States, or the rights and duties of any citizen of the United
States, he shall forthwith, by his warrant, commit such person to
prison, where prisoners under sentence of a court of the United States
may be lawfully committed, or, in his discretion, to the master or chief
officer of such foreign vessel, to be subject to the lawful orders,
control, and discipline of such master or chief officer, and to the
jurisdiction of the consular or commercial authority of the nation to
which such vessel belongs, to the exclusion of any authority or
jurisdiction in the premises of the United States or any State thereof.
No person shall be detained more than two months after his arrest, but
at the end of that time shall be set at liberty and shall not again be
arrested for the same cause. The expenses of the arrest and the
detention of the person so arrested shall be paid by the consular
officer making the application. (R. S., 4081.) (See R. S., 5280 as
amended Mar. 4, 1915.)

The district courts, and the United States commissioners, shall have
power to carry into effect, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof, the award, or arbitration, or decree of any consul,
vice-consul, or commercial agent of any foreign nation, made or rendered
by virtue of authority conferred on him as such consul, vice-consul, or
commercial agent, to sit as judge or arbitrator in such differences as
may arise between the captains and crews of the vessels belonging to the
nation whose interests are committed to his charge, application for the
exercise of such power being first made to such court or commissioner by
petition of such consul, vice-consul, or commercial agent. And said
courts and commissioners may issue all proper remedial process, mesne
and final, to carry into full effect such award, arbitration, or decree,
and to enforce obedience thereto, by imprisonment in the jail or other
place of confinement in the district in which the United States may
lawfully imprison any person arrested under the authority of the United
States, until such award, arbitration, or decree is complied with, or
the parties are otherwise discharged therefrom, by the consent in
writing of such consul, vice-consul, or commercial agent, or his
successor in office, or by the authority of the foreign government
appointing such consul, vice-consul, or commercial agent: _Provided,
however_, That the expenses of the said imprisonment, and maintenance of
the prisoners, and the cost of the proceedings, shall be borne by such
foreign government, or by its consul, vice-consul, or commercial agent
requiring such imprisonment. The marshals of the United States shall
serve all such process, and do all other acts necessary and proper to
carry into effect the premises, under the authority of the said courts
and commissioners. (R. S., 728; Mar. 3, 1911; sec. 271.)


Seamen's witness fees.

There shall be paid to each seaman or other person who is sent to the
United States from any foreign port, station, sea, or ocean, by any
United States minister, chargé d'affaires, consul, captain, or
commander, to give testimony in any criminal case depending in any court
of the United States, such compensation, exclusive of subsistence and
transportation, as such court may adjudge to be proper, not exceeding
one dollar for each day necessarily employed in such voyage, and in
arriving at the place of examination or trial. In fixing such
compensation, the court shall take into consideration the condition of
said seaman or witness, and whether his voyage has been broken up, to
his injury, by his being sent to the United States. When such seaman or
person is transported in an armed vessel of the United States no charge
for subsistence or transportation shall be allowed. When he is
transported in any other vessel, the compensation for his transportation
and subsistence, not exceeding in any case fifty cents a day, may be
fixed by the court, and shall be paid to the captain of said vessel
accordingly. (R. S. 851.)


Manning of merchant vessels.

In all merchant vessels of the United States of more than one hundred
tons gross, excepting those navigating rivers, harbors, bays, or sounds
exclusively, the sailors shall, while at sea, be divided into at least
two, and the firemen, oilers, and water tenders into at least three
watches, which shall be kept on duty successively for the performance of
ordinary work incident to the sailing and management of the vessel. The
seamen shall not be shipped to work alternately in the fireroom and on
deck, nor shall those shipped for deck duty be required to work in the
fireroom, or vice versa; but these provisions shall not limit either the
authority of the master or other officer or the obedience of the seamen
when, in the judgment of the master or other officer, the whole or any
part of the crew are needed for the maneuvering of the vessel or the
performance of work necessary for the safety of the vessel or her cargo,
or for the saving of life aboard other vessels in jeopardy, or when in
port or at sea from requiring the whole or any part of the crew to
participate in the performance of fire, lifeboat, and other drills.
While such vessel is in a safe harbor no seaman shall be required to do
any unnecessary work on Sundays or the following-named days: New Year's
Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day,
but this shall not prevent the dispatch of a vessel on regular schedule
or when ready to proceed on her voyage. And at all times while such
vessel is in a safe harbor, nine hours, inclusive of the anchor watch,
shall constitute a day's work. Whenever the master of any vessel shall
fail to comply with this section, the seamen shall be entitled to
discharge from such vessel and to receive the wages earned. But this
section shall not apply to fishing or whaling vessels, or yachts. (Mar.
4, 1915; sec. 2.) (Effective beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)

No vessel of one hundred tons gross and upward, except those navigating
rivers exclusively and the smaller inland lakes and except as provided
in section one of this Act, shall be permitted to depart from any port
of the United States unless she has on board a crew not less than
seventy-five per centum of which, in each department thereof, are able
to understand any order given by the officers of such vessel, nor unless
forty per centum in the first year, forty-five per centum in the second
year, fifty per centum in the third year, fifty-five per centum in the
fourth year after the passage of this Act, and thereafter sixty-five per
centum of her deck crew, exclusive of licensed officers and apprentices,
are of a rating not less than able seaman. Every person shall be rated
an able seaman, and qualified for service as such on the seas, who is
nineteen years of age or upward, and has had at least three years'
service on deck at sea or on the Great Lakes, on a vessel or vessels to
which this section applies, including decked fishing vessels, naval
vessels or coast guard vessels; and every person shall be rated an able
seaman, and qualified to serve as such on the Great Lakes and on the
smaller lakes, bays or sounds, who is nineteen years of age or upward
and has had at least eighteen months' service on deck at sea or on the
Great Lakes or on the smaller lakes, bays, or sounds, on a vessel or
vessels to which this section applies, including decked fishing vessels,
naval vessels, or coast guard vessels; and graduates of school ships
approved by and conducted under rules prescribed by the Secretary of
Commerce may be rated able seamen after twelve months' service at sea:
_Provided_, That upon examination, under rules prescribed by the
Department of Commerce as to eyesight, hearing, and physical condition,
such persons or graduates are found to be competent: _Provided further_,
That upon examination, under rules prescribed by the Department of
Commerce as to eyesight, hearing, physical condition, and knowledge of
the duties of seamanship a person found competent may be rated as able
seaman after having served on deck twelve months at sea, or on the Great
Lakes; but seamen examined and rated able seamen under this proviso
shall not in any case compose more than one-fourth of the number of able
seamen required by this section to be shipped or employed upon any
vessel.

Any person may make application to any board of local inspectors for a
certificate of service as able seaman, and upon proof being made to said
board by affidavit and examination, under rules approved by the
Secretary of Commerce, showing the nationality and age of the applicant
and the vessel or vessels on which he has had service and that he is
entitled to such certificate under the provisions of this section, the
board of local inspectors shall issue to said applicant a certificate of
service, which shall be retained by him and be accepted as prima facie
evidence of his rating as an able seaman.

Each board of local inspectors shall keep a complete record of all
certificates of service issued by them and to whom issued and shall keep
on file the affidavits upon which said certificates are issued.

The collector of customs may, upon his own motion, and shall, upon the
sworn information of any reputable citizen of the United States setting
forth that this section is not being complied with cause a muster of the
crew of any vessel to be made to determine the fact; and no clearance
shall be given to any vessel failing to comply with the provisions of
this section: _Provided_, That the collector of customs shall not be
required to cause such muster of the crew to be made unless said sworn
information has been filed with him for at least six hours before the
vessel departs, or is scheduled to depart: _Provided further_, That any
person that shall knowingly make a false affidavit for such purpose
shall be deemed guilty of perjury and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding
one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, within the discretion
of the court. Any violation of any provision of this section by the
owner, master, or officer in charge of the vessel shall subject the
owner of such vessel to a penalty of not less than $100 and not more
than $500: _And provided further_, That the Secretary of Commerce shall
make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this section, and nothing herein shall be held or
construed to prevent the Board of Supervising Inspectors, with the
approval of the Secretary of Commerce, from making rules and regulations
authorized by law as to vessels excluded from the operation of this
section. (Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 13.) (Effective on American vessels
beginning Nov. 4, 1915; on vessels of foreign nations not covered by
treaties Mar. 4, 1916; on vessels of other foreign nations after
termination of treaties.)


Undermanning.

In case of desertion or casualty resulting in the loss of one or more of
the seamen, the master must ship, if obtainable, a number equal to the
number of those whose services he has been deprived of by desertion or
casualty, who must be of the same or higher grade or rating with those
whose places they fill, and report the same to the United States consul
at the first port at which he shall arrive, without incurring the
penalty prescribed by the two preceding sections. This section shall not
apply to fishing or whaling vessels or yachts. (R. S., 4516; Dec. 21,
1898; sec. 1; Mar. 4, 1915; sec. 1.) (Effective beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)


Fellow-servant clause.

In any suit to recover damages for any injury sustained on board vessel
or in its service seamen having command shall not be held to be
fellow-servants with those under their authority. (Mar. 4, 1915; sec.
20.) (Effective beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)


Unseaworthy vessels.

If any person knowingly sends or attempts to send or is party to the
sending or attempting to send an American ship to sea, in the foreign or
coastwise trade, in such an unseaworthy state that the life of any
person is likely to be thereby endangered, he shall, in respect of each
offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed five
years, or both, at the discretion of the court, unless he proves that
either he used all reasonable means to insure her being sent to sea in a
seaworthy state, or that her going to sea in an unseaworthy state was,
under circumstances, reasonable and justifiable, and for the purposes of
giving that proof he may give evidence in the same manner as any other
witness. [This section shall not apply to fishing or whaling vessels or
yachts.—Dec. 21, 1898, sec. 26; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 11.]


War risk insurance.

"SEC. 3_a_. That whenever it shall appear to the Secretary of the
Treasury that the effecting of such insurance is desirable in the
national interest in the case of vessels engaged in any trade, the owner
of every American merchant vessel engaged in such trade shall insure the
master, officers, and crew of such vessel against loss of life or
personal injury from war risks as well as for compensation during
detention by an enemy of the United States following capture.

"Such insurance shall be effected either with the Bureau of War Risk
Insurance or in insurance companies, and on terms satisfactory to the
Secretary of the Treasury.

"Such insurance shall provide, and the Bureau of War Risk Insurance is
authorized to write policies so providing—

 "(_a_) In case of death, permanent disability which prevents the person
 injured from performing any and every kind of duty pertaining to his
 occupation, or the loss of both hands, both arms, both feet, both legs,
 or both eyes, or any two thereof, for the payment of an amount
 equivalent to one year's earnings, or to twelve times the monthly
 earnings of the insured, as fixed in the articles for the voyage
 (hereinafter referred to as the principal sum), but in no case shall
 such amount be more than $5000 or less than $1500;

 "(_b_) In case of any of the following losses, for the payment of the
 percentage of the principal sum indicated in the following tables:

   "One hand, fifty per centum;
   "One arm, sixty-five per centum;
   "One foot, fifty per centum;
   "One leg, sixty-five per centum;
   "One eye, forty-five per centum;
   "Total destruction of hearing, fifty per centum;

 "That the Bureau of War Risk Insurance may include in its policy
 undertakings to pay specified percentages of the principal sum for
 other losses or disabilities; and

 "(_c_) In case of detention by an enemy of the United States, following
 capture, for the payment during the continuance of such detention of
 compensation at the same rate as the earnings of the insured
 immediately preceding such detention, to be determined in substantially
 the same manner as provided in subdivision (_a_) of this section.

"The aggregate payments under this section in respect to any one person
shall not exceed the amount of the principal sum.

"Payments provided for in this section shall be made only to the master,
officer, or member of the crew concerned, except that a payment for loss
of life shall be made to the estate of the insured for distribution to
his family free from liability of debt, and payment on account of
detention by an enemy following capture shall be made to dependents of
the person detained, if designated by him.

"No claim under this section shall be valid unless made by the master,
officer, or member of the crew concerned, or his estate, or a person
designated under this section, within two years after the date on which
the President suspends the operations of this Act in so far as it
authorizes insurance by the United States."

"SEC. 3_b_. That in the event of failure of the owner of any vessel to
effect insurance of the master, officers, and crew of such vessel prior
to sailing, in accordance with section three _a_ of this Act, the
Secretary of the Treasury is hereby authorized to effect such insurance
with the Bureau of War Risk Insurance at the expense of the owner of
such vessel, and the latter shall be liable for such expense, and, in
addition, to a penalty of not exceeding $1000. The amount of such
premium, with interest and of the penalty and of all costs, shall be a
lien on the vessel." (June 12, 1917.)




CHAPTER XXV

DISCIPLINE AT SEA


Authority, to some minds, means oppression and injustice; people so
constituted should stay ashore; a ship has no use for them—they simply
cannot get along.

The orderly man lives his life aboard ship with the greatest freedom.

Discipline at sea is largely a matter of common sense. Officers who know
their business have very little trouble in achieving perfect discipline.
The laws governing lack of ability bear hard on the man who has shipped
to do work he is not qualified for. The disturber has a hard time when
handled by a Master who knows the law and his authority.

The laws relating to offenses on board ship are appended, not as guide
to crime, but to inform the seaman of the fact that the flag and the
laws of the land follow the ship out beyond the three-mile limit.

Some officers have a way with them that carries along the work of the
vessel without friction and with the utmost amount of dispatch. These
officers know their business thoroughly. They are absolutely just, which
means that the slacker and malingerer are given the full brunt of
disapproval. The "coming down" on a loafer, good and hard, helps more to
bring forth respect for an officer than anything else. When this is
coupled by even-handed justice, and a human way of doing things, such as
looking out for the comfort of their men, a happy vessel is bound to be
the result.

Seamen like nothing better than to know that they are under officers who
will run things on the level. It is like being under a decent government
that helps the weak and curbs the strong—there is a fascination to
running things right that merchant officers should cultivate.

Below are the punishments meted out to those that believe in individual
license, and who think that the individual can do as he pleases without
consulting the rest of us. They are wrong, of course, but most of all,
+they are most often, simply ignorant+.

Offenses and punishments.

Whenever any seaman who has been lawfully engaged or any apprentice to
the sea service commits any of the following offenses, he shall be
punished as follows:

 _First._ For desertion, by forfeiture of all or any part of the clothes
 or effects he leaves on board and of all or any part of the wages or
 emoluments which he has then earned.

 _Second._ For neglecting or refusing without reasonable cause to join
 his vessel or to proceed to sea in his vessel, or for absence without
 leave at any time within twenty-four hours of the vessel's sailing from
 any port, either at the commencement or during the progress of the
 voyage, or for absence at any time without leave and without sufficient
 reason from his vessel and from his duty, not amounting to desertion,
 by forfeiture from his wages of not more than two days' pay or
 sufficient to defray any expenses which shall have been properly
 incurred in hiring a substitute.

 _Third._ For quitting the vessel without leave, after her arrival at
 the port of her delivery and before she is placed in security, by
 forfeiture from his wages of not more than one month's pay.

 _Fourth._ For willful disobedience to any lawful command at sea, by
 being, at the option of the master, placed in irons until such
 disobedience shall cease, and upon arrival in port by forfeiture from
 his wages of not more than four days' pay, or, at the discretion of the
 court, by imprisonment for not more than one month.

 _Fifth._ For continued willful disobedience to lawful command or
 continued willful neglect of duty at sea, by being, at the option of
 the master, placed in irons, on bread and water, with full rations
 every fifth day, until such disobedience shall cease, and upon arrival
 in port by forfeiture, for every twenty-four hours' continuance of such
 disobedience or neglect, of a sum of not more than twelve days' pay, or
 by imprisonment for not more than three months, at the discretion of
 the court.

 _Sixth._ For assaulting any master or mate, by imprisonment for not
 more than two years.

 _Seventh._ For willfully damaging the vessel, or embezzling or
 willfully damaging any of the stores or cargo, by forfeiture out of his
 wages of a sum equal in amount to the loss thereby sustained, and also,
 at the discretion of the court, by imprisonment for not more than
 twelve months.

 _Eighth._ For any act of smuggling for which he is convicted and
 whereby loss or damage is occasioned to the master or owner, he shall
 be liable to pay such master or owner such a sum as is sufficient to
 reimburse the master or owner for such loss or damage, and the whole or
 any part of his wages may be retained in satisfaction or on account of
 such liability, and he shall be liable to imprisonment for a period of
 not more than twelve months. (R. S., 4596; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 19; Mar.
 4, 1915; sec. 7.) (Effective beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)

Upon the commission of any of the offenses enumerated in the preceding
section an entry thereof shall be made in the official log book on the
day on which the offense was committed, and shall be signed by the
master and by the mate or one of the crew; and the offender, if still in
the vessel, shall, before her next arrival at any port, or, if she is at
the time in port, before her departure therefrom, be furnished with a
copy of such entry, and have the same read over distinctly and audibly
to him, and may thereupon make such a reply thereto as he thinks fit;
and a statement that a copy of the entry has been so furnished, or the
same has been so read over, together with his reply, if any, made by the
offender, shall likewise be entered and signed in the same manner. In
any subsequent legal proceedings the entries hereinbefore required
shall, if practicable, be produced or proved, and in default of such
production of proof the court hearing the case may, at its discretion,
refuse to receive evidence of the offense. (R. S., 4597; Dec. 21, 1898;
sec. 20.)

All clothes, effects, and wages which, under the provisions of this
Title [R. S., 4501-4613], are forfeited for desertion, shall be applied,
in the first instance, in payment of the expenses occasioned by such
desertion, to the master or owner of the vessel from which the desertion
has taken place, and the balance, if any, shall be paid by the master or
owner to any shipping-commissioner resident at the port at which the
voyage of such vessel terminates; and the shipping-commissioner shall
account for and pay over such balance to the judge of the district court
within one month after the commissioner receives the same, to be
disposed of by him in the same manner as is prescribed for the disposal
of the money, effects, and wages of deceased seamen. Whenever any master
or owner neglects or refuses to pay over to the shipping-commissioner
such balance, he shall be liable to a penalty of double the amount
thereof, recoverable by the commissioner in the same manner that
seamen's wages are recovered. In all other cases of forfeiture of wages,
the forfeiture shall be for the benefit of the master or owner by whom
the wages are payable. (R. S., 4604.)

Any master of, or any seaman or apprentice belonging to, any merchant
vessel, who, by willful breach of duty, or by reason of drunkenness,
does any act tending to the immediate loss or destruction of, or serious
damage to such vessel, or tending immediately to endanger the life or
limb of any person belonging to or on board of such vessel; or who, by
willful breach of duty, or by neglect of duty, or by reason of
drunkenness, refuses or omits to do any lawful act proper and requisite
to be done by him for preserving such vessel from immediate loss,
destruction, or serious damage, or for preserving any person belonging
to or on board of such ship from immediate danger to life or limb,
shall, for every such offense, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than twelve months. (R. S.,
4602.)

Sheath knives not allowed.

No seaman in the merchant-service shall wear any sheath-knife on
shipboard. It shall be the duty of the master of any vessel registered,
enrolled, or licensed under the laws of the United States, and of the
person entering into contract for the employment of a seaman upon any
such vessel, to inform every person offering to ship himself of the
provisions of this section, and to require his compliance therewith,
under a penalty of fifty dollars for each omission, to be sued for and
recovered in the name of the United States, under the direction of the
Secretary of Commerce; one half for the benefit of the informer, and the
other half for the benefit of the fund for the relief of sick and
disabled seamen. (R. S. 4608; Feb. 14, 1903; sec. 10.)

Corporal punishment prohibited.

Flogging and all other forms of corporal punishment are hereby
prohibited on board of any vessel, and no form of corporal punishment on
board of any vessel shall be deemed justifiable, and any master or other
officer thereof who shall violate the aforesaid provisions of this
section, or either thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not less than three months nor more than
two years. Whenever any officer other than the master of such vessel
shall violate any provision of this section, it shall be the duty of
such master to surrender such officer to the proper authorities as soon
as practicable, provided he has actual knowledge of the misdemeanor, or
complaint thereof is made within three days after reaching port. Any
failure on the part of such master to use due diligence to comply
herewith, which failure shall result in the escape of such officer,
shall render the master or vessel or the owner of the vessel liable in
damages for such flogging or corporal punishment to the person illegally
punished by such officer. (R. S., 4611; Dec. 21, 1898; sec. 22; Mar. 4,
1915; sec. 9.) (Effective beginning Nov. 4, 1915.)

Procedure.

All penalties and forfeitures imposed by this Title [R. S., 4501-4613],
for the recovery whereof no specific mode is hereinbefore provided, may
be recovered, with costs, in any district court of the United States, at
the suit of any district attorney of the United States, or at the suit
of any person by information to any district attorney in any port of the
United States, where or near to where the offense is committed or the
offender is found; and if a conviction is had, and the sum imposed as a
penalty by the court is not paid either immediately after the
conviction, or within such period as the court at the time of the
conviction appoints, it shall be lawful for the court to commit the
offender to prison, there to be imprisoned for the term hereinbefore
provided in case of such offense, the commitment to be terminable upon
payment of the amount and costs; and all penalties and forfeitures
mentioned in this Title for which no special application is provided,
shall, when recovered, be paid and applied in manner following: So much
as the court shall determine, and the residue shall be paid to the court
and be remitted from time to time, by order of the judge, to the
Treasury of the United States, and appropriated as provided for in
section forty-five hundred and fortyfive: _Provided always_, That it
shall be lawful for the court before which any proceeding shall be
instituted for the recovery of any pecuniary penalty imposed by this
act, to mitigate or reduce such penalty as to such court shall appear
just and reasonable; but no such penalty shall be reduced to less than
one-third of its original amount: _Provided also_, That all proceedings
so to be instituted shall be commenced within two years next after the
commission of the offense, if the same shall have been committed at or
beyond the Cape of Good Hope or Cape Horn, or within one year if
committed elsewhere, or within two months after the return of the
offender and the complaining party to the United States; and there shall
be no appeal from any decision of any of the district courts, unless the
amount sued for exceeds the sum of five hundred dollars. (R. S., 4610.)


CRIMES

Place of trial.

The trial of all offenses committed upon the high seas or elsewhere, out
of the jurisdiction of any particular State or district, shall be in the
district where the offender is found, or into which he is first brought.

When any offense against the United States is begun in one judicial
district and completed in another, it shall be deemed to have been
committed in either, and may be dealt with, inquired of, tried,
determined, and punished in either district, in the same manner as if it
had been actually and wholly committed therein.

All pecuniary penalties and forfeitures may be used for and recovered
either in the district where they accrue or in the district where the
offender is found.

The crimes and offenses defined in this chapter shall be punished as
herein prescribed:

 _First._ When committed upon the high seas, or on any other waters
 within the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction of the United States and
 out of the jurisdiction of any particular State, or when committed
 within the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction of the United States and
 out of the jurisdiction of any particular State on board any vessel
 belonging in whole or in part to the United States or any citizen
 thereof, or to any corporation created by or under the laws of the
 United States, or of any State, Territory, or District thereof.

 _Second._ When committed upon any vessel registered, licensed, or
 enrolled under the laws of the United States, and being on a voyage
 upon the waters of any of the Great Lakes, namely: Lake Superior, Lake
 Michigan, Lake Huron, Lake Saint Clair, Lake Erie, Lake Ontario, or any
 of the waters connecting any of said lakes, or upon the River Saint
 Lawrence where the same constitutes the International boundary line.

 _Third._ When committed within or on any lands reserved or acquired for
 the exclusive use of the United States, and under the exclusive
 jurisdiction thereof, or any place purchased or otherwise acquired by
 the United States by consent of the legislature of the State in which
 the same shall be, for the erection of a fort, magazine, arsenal,
 dockyard, or other needful building.

 _Fourth._ On any island, rock, or key, containing deposits of guano,
 which may, at the discretion of the President, be considered as
 appertaining to the United States. (R. S., 730; Mar. 3, 1911; sec. 42;
 sec. 43; Mar. 4, 1909; sec. 272; Repeals R. S., 5339.)

Murder.

Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice
aforethought. Every murder perpetrated by poison, lying in wait, or any
other kind of willful, deliberate, malicious, and premeditated killing;
or committed in the perpetration of, or attempt to perpetrate, any
arson, rape, burglary, or robbery; or perpetrated from a premeditated
design unlawfully and maliciously to effect the death of any human being
other than him who is killed, is murder in the first degree. Any other
murder is murder in the second degree. (Sec. 273.)

Manslaughter.

Manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without malice. It
is of two kinds:

 _First._ Voluntary—Upon a sudden quarrel or heat of passion.

 _Second._ Involuntary—In the commission of an unlawful act not
 amounting to a felony, or in the commission of a lawful act which might
 produce death, in an unlawful manner, or without due caution and
 circumspection.

Every person guilty of murder in the first degree shall suffer death.
Every person guilty of murder in the second degree shall be imprisoned
not less than ten years and may be imprisoned for life. Every person
guilty of voluntary manslaughter shall be imprisoned not more than ten
years. Every person guilty of involuntary manslaughter shall be
imprisoned not more than three years, or fined not exceeding one
thousand dollars, or both. (Sec. 274; Repeals R. S., 5341; sec. 275;
Repeals R. S., 5340, 5343.)

Assault.

Whoever shall assault another with intent to commit murder, or rape,
shall be imprisoned not more than twenty years. Whoever shall assault
another with intent to commit any felony, except murder, or rape, shall
be fined not more than three thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more
than ten years, or both. Whoever, with intent to do bodily harm, and
without just cause or excuse, shall assault another with a dangerous
weapon, instrument, or other thing, shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
Whoever shall unlawfully strike, beat, or wound another, shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both. Whoever shall unlawfully assault another, shall be
fined not more than three hundred dollars, or imprisoned not more than
three months, or both.

Whoever shall attempt to commit murder or manslaughter, except as
provided in the preceding section, shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than three years. (Sec. 276;
Repeals R. S., 5345, 5346; sec. 277; Repeals R. S., 5342.)

Rape.

Whoever shall commit the crime of rape shall suffer death.

Whoever shall carnally and unlawfully know any female under the age of
sixteen years, or shall be accessory to such carnal and unlawful
knowledge before the fact, shall, for a first offense, be imprisoned not
more than fifteen years, and for a subsequent offense be imprisoned not
more than thirty years. (Sec. 278; Repeals R. S., 5345; sec. 279.)

Seduction.

Every master, officer, seaman, or other person employed on board of any
American vessel who, during the voyage under promise of marriage, or by
threats, or the exercise of authority, or solicitation, or the making of
gifts or presents, seduces and has illicit connection with any female
passenger, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars, or
imprisoned not more than one year, or both; but subsequent intermarriage
of the parties may be pleaded in bar of conviction.

When a person is convicted of a violation of the section last preceding,
the court may, in its discretion, direct that the amount of the fine,
when paid, be paid for the use of the female seduced, or her child, if
she have any; but no conviction shall be had on the testimony of the
female seduced, without other evidence, nor unless the indictment is
found within one year after the arrival of the vessel on which the
offense was committed at the port of its destination. (Sec. 280; Repeals
R. S., 5349; sec. 281; Repeals R. S., 5350, 5351.)

Death from negligence, misconduct, etc.

Every captain, engineer, pilot, or other person employed on any
steamboat or vessel, by whose misconduct, negligence, or inattention to
his duties on such vessel the life of any person is destroyed, and every
owner, charterer, inspector, or other public officer, through whose
fraud, neglect, connivance, misconduct, or violation of law the life of
any person is destroyed, shall be fined not more than ten thousand
dollars, or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both: _Provided_,
That when the owner or charterer of any steamboat or vessel shall be a
corporation, any executive officer of such corporation, for the time
being actually charged with the control and management of the operation,
equipment, or navigation of such steamboat or vessel, who has knowingly
and willfully caused or allowed such fraud, neglect, connivance,
misconduct, or violation of law, by which the life of any person is
destroyed, shall be fined not more than ten thousand dollars, or
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both. (Sec. 282; Repeals R. S.,
5344, and act Mar. 3, 1905; sec. 5.)

Mayhem.

Whoever, with intent to maim or disfigure, shall cut, bite, or slit, the
nose, ear, or lip, or cut out or disable the tongue, or put out or
destroy an eye, or cut off or disable a limb or any member of another
person; or whoever, with like intent, shall throw or pour upon another
person, any scalding hot water, vitriol, or other corrosive acid, or
caustic substance whatever, shall be fined not more than one thousand
dollars, or imprisoned not more than seven years, or both. (Sec. 283;
Repeals R. S., 5348.)

Robbery.

Whoever, by force and violence, or by putting in fear, shall feloniously
take from the person or presence of another anything of value, shall be
imprisoned not more than fifteen years. (Sec. 284; Repeals R. S., 5370.)

Arson.

Whoever shall maliciously set fire to, burn, or attempt to burn, or by
any means destroy or injure, or attempt to destroy or injure, any
arsenal, armory, magazine, rope-walk, ship house, warehouse, blockhouse,
or barrack, or any storehouse, barn, or stable, not parcel of a dwelling
house, or any other building not mentioned in the section last
preceding, or any vessel built, building, or undergoing repair, or any
light-house, or beacon, or any machinery, timber, cables, rigging, or
other materials or appliances for building, repairing, or fitting out
vessels, or any pile of wood, boards, or other lumber, or any military,
naval, or victualing stores, arms, or other munitions of war, shall be
fined not more than five thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than
twenty years. (Sec. 286; Repeals R. S., 5386.)

Larceny.

Whoever shall take and carry away, with intent to steal or purloin, any
personal property of another, shall be punished as follows: If the
property taken is of a value exceeding fifty dollars, or is taken from
the person of another, by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars,
or imprisonment for not more than ten years, or both; in all other
cases, by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by
imprisonment not more than one year, or both. If the property stolen
consists of any evidence of debt, or other written instrument, the
amount of money due thereon, or secured to be paid thereby, and
remaining unsatisfied, or which in any contingency might be collected
thereon, or the value of the property the title to which is shown
thereby, or the sum which might be recovered in the absence thereof,
shall be deemed to be the value of the property stolen. (Sec. 287;
Repeals R. S., 5356.)

Receiver of stolen property.

Whoever shall buy, receive, or conceal, any money, goods, bank notes, or
other thing which may be the subject of larceny, which has been
feloniously taken, stolen, or embezzled, from any other person, knowing
the same to have been so taken, stolen, or embezzled, shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than three years;
and such person may be tried either before or after the conviction of
the principal offender. (Sec. 288; Repeals R. S., 5357.)

Miscellaneous offenses.

Whoever, within the territorial limits of any State, organized
Territory, or District, but within or upon any of the places now
existing or hereafter reserved or acquired, described in section two
hundred and seventy-two of this Act, shall do or omit the doing of any
act or thing which is not made penal by any law of Congress, but which
if committed or omitted within the jurisdiction of the State, Territory,
or District in which such place is situated, by the laws thereof now in
force would be penal, shall be deemed guilty of a like offense and be
subject to a like punishment; and every such State, Territorial, or
District law shall, for the purposes of this section, continue in force,
notwithstanding any subsequent repeal or amendment thereof by any such
State, Territory, or District. (Sec. 289; Repeals R. S., 5891.)

Forgery.

Whoever shall falsely make, forge, counterfeit, or alter any instrument
in imitation of, or purporting to be, an abstract or official copy or
certificate of the recording, registry, or enrollment of any vessel, in
the office of any collector of the customs, or a license to any vessel
for carrying on the coasting trade or fisheries of the United States, or
a certificate of ownership, pass, passport, sea letter, or clearance,
granted for any vessel, under the authority of the United States, or a
permit, debenture, or other official document granted by any collector
or other officer of the customs by virtue of his office; or whoever
shall utter, publish, or pass, or attempt to utter, publish, or pass, as
true, any such false, forged, counterfeited, or falsely altered
instrument, abstract, official copy, certificate, license, pass,
passport, sea letter, clearance, permit, debenture, or other official
document herein specified, knowing the same to be false, forged,
counterfeited, or falsely altered, with an intent to defraud, shall be
fined not more than one thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than
three years. (Sec. 72; Repeals R. S., 5423.)

Ill treatment of crew.

Whoever, being the master or officer of a vessel of the United States,
on the high seas, or on any other waters within the admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction of the United States, beats, wounds, or without
justifiable cause, imprisons any of the crew of such vessel, or
withholds from them suitable food and nourishment, or inflicts upon them
any cruel and unusual punishment, shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to repeal or modify section
forty-six hundred and eleven of the Revised Statutes. (Sec. 291; Repeals
R. S., 5347.)

Mutiny.

Whoever, being of the crew of a vessel of the United States, on the high
seas, or on any other waters within the admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction of the United States, endeavors to make a revolt or mutiny
on board such vessel, or combines, conspires, or confederates with any
other person on board to make such revolt or mutiny, or solicits,
incites, or stirs up any other of the crew to disobey or resist the
lawful orders of the master or other officer of such vessel, or to
refuse or neglect their proper duty on board thereof, or to betray their
proper trust, or assembles with others in a tumultuous and mutinous
manner, or makes a riot on board thereof, or unlawfully confines the
master or other commanding officer thereof, shall be fined not more than
one thousand dollars, or imprisoned not more than five years or both.
(Sec. 292; Repeals R. S., 5359.)

Whoever, being of the crew of a vessel of the United States, on the high
seas, or on any other waters within the admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction of the United States, unlawfully and with force, or by
fraud, or intimidation, usurps the command of such vessel from the
master or other lawful officer in command thereof, or deprives him of
authority and command on board, or resists or prevents him in the free
and lawful exercise thereof, or transfers such authority and command to
another not lawfully entitled thereto, is guilty of a revolt and mutiny,
and shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars and imprisoned not
more than ten years. (Sec. 293; Repeals R. S., 5360.)

Abandonment of seamen.

Whoever, being master or commander of a vessel of the United States,
while abroad, maliciously and without justifiable cause forces any
officer or mariner of such vessel on shore, in order to leave him behind
in any foreign port or place, or refuses to bring home again all such
officers and mariners of such vessel whom he carried out with him, as
are in a condition to return and willing to return, when he is ready to
proceed on his homeward voyage, shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars, or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. (Sec.
295; Repeals R. S., 5363.)

Barratry.

Whoever, on the high seas, or within the United States, willfully and
corruptly conspires, combines, and confederates with any other person,
such other person being either within or without the United States, to
cast away or otherwise destroy any vessel, with intent to injure any
person that may have underwritten or may thereafter underwrite any
policy of insurance thereon or on goods on board thereof, or with intent
to injure any person that has lent or advanced, or may lend or advance,
any money on such vessel on bottomry or respondentia; or whoever, within
the United States, builds, or fits out, or aids in building or fitting
out, any vessel with intent that the same be cast away or destroyed,
with the intent hereinbefore mentioned, shall be fined not more than ten
thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than ten years. (Sec. 296;
Repeals R. S., 5364.)

Wrecking.

Whoever plunders, steals, or destroys any money, goods, merchandise, or
other effects, from or belonging to any vessel in distress, or wrecked,
lost, stranded, or cast away, upon the sea, or upon any reef, shoal,
bank, or rocks of the sea, or in any other place within the admiralty
and maritime jurisdiction of the United States, shall be fined not more
than five thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than ten years; and
whoever willfully obstructs the escape of any person endeavoring to save
his life from such vessel, or the wreck thereof; or whoever holds out or
shows any false light, or extinguishes any true light, with intent to
bring any vessel sailing upon the sea into danger, or distress, or
shipwreck, shall be imprisoned not less than ten years and may be
imprisoned for life. (Sec. 297; Repeals R. S., 5358.)

Plundering vessel.

Whoever, upon the high seas or on any other waters within the admiralty
and maritime jurisdiction of the United States, by surprise or by open
force, maliciously attacks or sets upon any vessel belonging to another,
with an intent unlawfully to plunder the same, or to despoil any owner
thereof of any moneys, goods, or merchandise laden on board thereof,
shall be fined not more than five thousand dollars and imprisoned not
more than ten years. (Sec. 298; Repeals R. S., 5361.)

Whoever, upon the high seas or on any other waters within the admiralty
and maritime jurisdiction of the United States, and out of the
jurisdiction of any particular State, breaks or enters any vessel, with
intent to commit any felony, or maliciously cuts, spoils, or destroys
any cordage, cable, buoys, buoy-rope, head-fast, or other fast, fixed to
the anchor or moorings, belonging to any vessel shall be fined not more
than one thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than five years.

Casting away vessel.

Whoever, upon the high seas or on any other waters within the admiralty
and maritime jurisdiction of the United States, willfully and corruptly
casts away or otherwise destroys any vessel, of which he is owner, in
whole or in part, with intent to prejudice any person that may
underwrite any policy of insurance thereon, or any merchant that may
have goods thereon, or any other owner of such vessel, shall be
imprisoned for life or for any term of years.

Whoever, not being an owner, upon the high seas or on any other waters
within the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction of the United States,
willfully and corruptly casts away or otherwise destroys any vessel of
the United States to which he belongs, or, willfully, with intent to
destroy the same, sets fire to any such vessel, or otherwise attempts
the destruction thereof, shall be imprisoned not more than ten years.

The words "vessel of the United States," wherever they occur in this
chapter, shall be construed to mean a vessel belonging in whole or in
part to the United States, or any citizen thereof, or any corporation
created by or under the laws of the United States, or of any State,
Territory, or District thereof. (Sec. 298; Repeals R. S., 5361; sec.
299; Repeals R. S., 5362; sec. 300; Repeals R. S., 5365; sec. 301;
Repeals R. S., 5366, 5367; sec. 310.)

Crimes on the Great Lakes.

Every person who shall, upon any vessel registered or enrolled under the
laws of the United States, and being on a voyage upon the waters of any
of the Great Lakes, namely, Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, Lake Huron,
Lake Saint Clair, Lake Erie, Lake Ontario, or any of the waters
connecting any of the said lakes, commit or be guilty of any of the
acts, neglects, or omissions, respectively, mentioned in chapter three
[R. S., 5339-5391] of title seventy of the Revised Statutes of the
United States shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished with the same
punishments in the said title and chapter, respectively affixed to the
same offenses therein mentioned, respectively. (Sept. 4, 1890.)

The circuit and district courts of the United States, respectively, are
hereby vested with the same jurisdiction in respect to the offenses
mentioned in the first section of this act that they by law have and
possess in respect of the offenses in said chapter and title in the
first section of this act mentioned, and said courts, respectively, are
also for the purpose of this act vested with all and the same
jurisdiction they, respectively, have by force of title thirteen,
chapter three [R. S., 563-571], and title thirteen, chapter seven [R.
S., 629-657], of the Revised Statutes of the United States. [See act
Mar. 4, 1909, sec. 272, par. 2, p. 468.] (Sec. 2.)


PIRACY

Piracy.

The President is authorized to employ so many of the public armed
vessels as in his judgment the service may require, with suitable
instructions to the commanders thereof in protecting the merchant
vessels of the United States and their crews from piratical aggressions
and depredations. (R. S., 4293.)

The President is authorized to instruct the commanders of the public
armed vessels of the United States to subdue, seize, take, and send into
any port of the United States, any armed vessel or boat, or any vessel
or boat, the crew whereof shall be armed, and which shall have attempted
or committed any piratical aggression, search, restraint, depredation,
or seizure, upon any vessel of the United States, or of the citizens
thereof, or upon any other vessel; and also to retake any vessel of the
United States, or its citizens, which may have been unlawfully captured
upon the high seas. (R. S., 4294.)

The commander and crew of any merchant-vessel of the United States,
owned wholly, or in part, by a citizen thereof, may oppose and defend
against any aggression, search, restraint, depredation, or seizure,
which shall be attempted upon such vessel, or upon any other vessel so
owned, by the commander or crew of any armed vessel whatsoever, not
being a public armed vessel of some nation in amity with the United
States, and may subdue and capture the same; and may also retake any
vessel so owned which may have been captured by the commander or crew of
any such armed vessel, and send the same into any port of the United
States. (R. S., 4295.)

Whenever any vessel, which shall have been built, purchased, fitted out
in whole or in part, or held for the purpose of being employed in the
commission of any piratical aggression, search, restraint, depredation,
or seizure, or in the commission of any other act of piracy as defined
by the law of nations, or from which any piratical aggression, search,
restraint, depredation, or seizure shall have been first attempted or
made, is captured and brought into or captured in any port of the United
States, the same shall be adjudged and condemned to their use, and that
of the captors after due process and trial in any court having admiralty
jurisdiction, and which shall be holden for the district into which such
captured vessel shall be brought; and the same court shall thereupon
order a sale and distribution thereof accordingly, and at its
discretion. (R. S., 4296.)

Any vessel built, purchased, fitted out in whole or in part, or held for
the purpose of being employed in the commission of any piratical
aggression, search, restraint, depredation, or seizure, or in the
commission of any other act of piracy, as defined by the law of nations,
shall be liable to be captured and brought into any port of the United
States if found upon the high seas, or to be seized if found in port or
place within the United States, whether the same shall have actually
sailed upon any piratical expedition or not, and whether any act of
piracy shall have been committed or attempted upon or from such vessel
or not; and any such vessel may be adjudged and condemned, if captured
by a vessel authorized as hereinafter mentioned, to the use of the
United States and to that of the captors, and if seized by a collector,
surveyor, or marshal, then to the use of the United States. (R. S.,
4297.)

The President is authorized to instruct the commanders of the public
armed vessels of the United States, and to authorize the commanders of
any other armed vessels sailing under the authority of any letters of
marque and reprisal granted by Congress, or the commanders of any other
suitable vessels, to subdue, seize, take, and, if on the high seas, to
send into any port of the United States, any vessel or boat built,
purchased, fitted out, or held as mentioned in the preceding section.
(R. S., 4298.)

The collectors of the several ports of entry, the surveyors of the
several ports of delivery, and the marshals of the several judicial
districts within the United States, shall seize any vessel or boat
built, purchased, fitted out, or held as mentioned in section forty-two
hundred and ninety-seven, which may be found within their respective
ports or districts, and to cause the same to be proceeded against and
disposed of as provided by that section. (R. S., 4299.)

Crimes deemed piracy.

Whoever, on the high seas, commits the crime of piracy as defined by the
law of nations, and is afterwards brought into or found in the United
States, shall be imprisoned for life.

Whoever, being a seaman, lays violent hands upon his commander, thereby
to hinder and prevent his fighting in defense of his vessel or the goods
intrusted to him, is a pirate, and shall be imprisoned for life.

Whoever, being engaged in any piratical cruise, or enterprise, or being
of the crew of any piratical vessel, lands from such vessel, and on
shore commits robbery, is a pirate, and shall be imprisoned for life.

Whoever, being a citizen of the United States, commits any murder or
robbery, or any act or hostility against the United States, or against
any citizen thereof, on the high seas, under color of any commission
from any foreign prince, or state, or on pretense of authority from any
person, is, notwithstanding the pretense of such authority, a pirate,
and shall be imprisoned for life.

Whoever, being a citizen or subject of any foreign state, is found and
taken on the sea making war upon the United States, or cruising against
the vessels and property thereof, or of the citizens of the same,
contrary to the provisions of any treaty existing between the United
States and the state of which the offender is a citizen or subject, when
by such treaty such acts are declared to be piracy, is guilty of piracy,
and shall be imprisoned for life.

Whoever, being a captain or other officer or mariner of a vessel upon
the high seas or on any other waters within the admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction of the United States, piratically or feloniously runs away
with such vessel, or with any goods or merchandise thereof, to the value
of fifty dollars, or who yields up such vessel voluntarily to any
pirate, shall be fined not more than ten thousand dollars, or imprisoned
not more than ten years, or both.

Whoever attempts or endeavors to corrupt any commander, master, officer,
or mariner to yield up or to run away with any vessel, or with any
goods, wares, or merchandise, or to turn pirate, or to go over to or
confederate with pirates, or in any wise to trade with any pirate,
knowing him to be such, or furnishes such pirate with any ammunition,
stores, or provisions of any kind, or fits out any vessel knowingly and,
with a design to trade with, supply, or correspond with any pirate or
robber upon the seas; or whoever consults, combines, confederates, or
corresponds with any pirate or robber upon the seas, knowing him to be
guilty of any piracy or robbery; or whoever, being a seaman, confines
the master of any vessel, shall be fined not more than one thousand
dollars and imprisoned not more than three years.

The words "vessel of the United States," wherever they occur in this
chapter, shall be construed to mean a vessel belonging in whole or in
part to the United States, or any citizen thereof, or any corporation
created by or under the laws of the United States, or of any State,
Territory, or District thereof. (Mar. 4, 1909; sec. 290; Repeals R. S.,
5368; sec. 294; Repeals R. S., 5369; sec. 302; Repeals R. S., 5371; sec.
304; Repeals R. S., 5373; sec. 305; Repeals R. S., 5374; sec. 506;
Repeals R. S., 5383; sec. 307; Repeals R. S., 5384; sec. 310.)




APPENDIX A

CUSTOMS DISTRICTS, PORTS, AND SUB-PORTS OF UNITED STATES


Names of +DISTRICTS+ are shown in +BOLD FACE CAPITALS+ followed by the
district +Headquarters in Capitals and small letters+. The District
Boundary follows immediately below with the Ports of Entry following.


MAINE AND NEW HAMPSHIRE—Portland

_State of Maine and all of New Hampshire except county of Coos_

Portland, Houlton, Fort Fairfield, Mars Hill, Van Buren, Madawaska,
Monticello, Machias, Lubec, Bath, Boothbay, Limestone, Fort Kent,
Bridgewater, Eastport, Calais, Bangor, Ellsworth, Rockland, Vanceboro,
Lowelltown (or Holeb), Belfast, Rockport, Castine, Vinalhaven, South
West Harbor, Portsmouth, N. H. (including Kittery).


VERMONT—St. Albans

_All of the State of Vermont; and the County of Coos in the State of
New Hampshire_

Newport, North Troy, Derbyline, Island Pond, Bleecher Falls, St. Albans,
Richford, Burlington, Alburg, Swanton, Highgate.


MASSACHUSETTS—Boston

_All of the State of Massachusetts_

Boston, Gloucester, Salem (including Beverly, Marblehead, and Lynn),
Provincetown, Plymouth, Barnstable, Vineyard Haven, Fall River, New
Bedford, Worcester, Springfield, Holyoke.


RHODE ISLAND—Providence

_All of the State of Rhode Island_

Providence, Newport.


CONNECTICUT—Bridgeport

_All of the State of Connecticut_

Hartford, New Haven, New London, Stonington, Middletown, South
Manchester, Bridgeport, Stamford, Greenwich, Norwalk.


ST. LAWRENCE—Ogdensburg

_State of New York, to include all of the counties of Clinton, Essex,
Franklin, St. Lawrence, Jefferson, and Lewis_

Ogdensburg, Nyando, Morristown, Rouses Point, Malone, Fort Covington,
Plattsburg, Champlain, Chateaugay, Moores Junction, Waddington, Cape
Vincent, Alexandria Bay, Chaumont, Clayton.


ROCHESTER—Rochester

_All of the counties of Oswego, Oneida, Onondaga, Cayuga, Seneca,
Wayne, Broome, Tompkins, Chenango, Madison, Cortland, Hamilton,
Schuyler, Chemung, Herkimer, Monroe, Ontario, Livingston, Yates,
Steuben, Orleans, Genesee, and Wyoming_

Rochester, Oswego, Utica, Syracuse, Charlotte, Fair Haven, Sodus Point.


BUFFALO—Buffalo

_All of the counties of Niagara, Erie, Cattaraugus, and Chautauqua_

Buffalo, Niagara Falls, North Tonawanda (including Tonawanda), Dunkirk,
Lewiston.


NEW YORK—New York

_To include all that part of the State of New York not expressly
included in the districts of St. Lawrence, Rochester, and Buffalo, and
also to include the counties of Sussex, Passaic, Hudson, Bergen, Essex,
Union, Middlesex, and Monmouth, in the State of New Jersey_

New York, Newark, Perth Amboy, Patchogue, Greenport, Albany.


PHILADELPHIA—Philadelphia

_To include all that part of the State of Pennsylvania lying east of 79°
west longitude, all of the State of Delaware, and all of that part of
the State of New Jersey not included in the district of New York_

Philadelphia (to include Camden and Gloucester City, N. J.), Somers
Point, Thompsons Point, Tuckerton, Chester, Wilmington, Lewes.


PITTSBURGH—Pittsburgh

_To include all of the State of West Virginia and all of the State of
Pennsylvania lying west of 79° west longitude, except the county of
Erie_

Pittsburgh, Wheeling.


MARYLAND—Baltimore

_To include all of the State of Maryland, the District of Columbia,
and the county of Alexandria in the State of Virginia_

Baltimore, Washington, Crisfield, Annapolis, Alexandria.


VIRGINIA—Norfolk

_To include all of the State of Virginia, except the county of
Alexandria_

(The port of Norfolk shall include both of said cities and the waters
and shores of Hampton Roads)

Norfolk, Newport News, Richmond, Petersburg, Cape Charles City,
Chincoteague, Reedville.


NORTH CAROLINA—Wilmington

_To include all of the State of North Carolina_

Wilmington, Elizabeth City, Newbern, Manteo, Beaufort.


SOUTH CAROLINA—Charleston

_All of the State of South Carolina_

Charleston, Georgetown, Beaufort.


GEORGIA—Savannah

_All of the State of Georgia except the north shore of the St. Marys
River and the city of St. Marys_

Savannah, Brunswick, Darien, Atlanta.


FLORIDA—Tampa

_All of the State of Florida and the north bank of the St. Marys River
and the city of St. Marys, Ga._

Tampa (including Port Tampa), Key West, Punta Gorda, Boca Grande, Miami,
Jacksonville, Pensacola, St. Andrews, St. Augustine, Fernandina
(including St. Marys, Ga.), Cedar Keys, Port Inglis, Apalachicola,
Carrabelle.


MOBILE—Mobile

_All of the State of Alabama and all that part of the State of
Mississippi lying south of 31° north latitude_

Mobile, Birmingham, Gulfport, Scranton.


NEW ORLEANS—New Orleans

_All of the State of Louisiana and all that part of the State of
Mississippi lying north of 31° north latitude_

New Orleans, Morgan City.


SABINE—Port Arthur

_To include the following territory; Beginning on the Gulf of Mexico at
the center of the stream of Sabine Pass; thence north with the center of
the stream of Sabine Pass to Sabine Lake; thence with the center of the
stream of Sabine Lake to a point directly opposite to the Sabine River;
thence north with the east shore of the Sabine River to the north
boundary line of Shelby County, Tex.; thence west to the Neches River;
thence down said river with its west shore to a north boundary line of
Jefferson County, thence in a westerly direction with the said north
boundary line to the east boundary line of Liberty County, Tex.; thence
south to the Gulf of Mexico; thence in an easterly direction along the
Gulf shores to the place of beginning_

Port Arthur, Sabine.


GALVESTON—Galveston

_All of the State of Texas except the territory included in the
districts of Sabine, Laredo, El Paso, and Eagle Pass_

Galveston (including Port Bolivar and Texas City), San Antonio, Dallas,
Houston, Port Lavaca.


LAREDO—Laredo

_All of the counties of Cameron, Hidalgo, Starr, Nueces, Zapata, Duval,
Brooks, Willacy, Jim Wells, Aransas, Webb, La Salle, Dimmit, McMullen,
Live Oak, Bee, Refugio, and San Patricio in the State of Texas_

Laredo, Brownsville, Rio Grande City, Corpus Christi, Roma,
Santa Maria.


EL PASO—El Paso

_All the counties of El Paso and Culberson in the State of Texas and
all of the State of New Mexico_

El Paso, Columbus, New Mexico.


EAGLE PASS—Eagle Pass

_All of the counties in the State of Texas lying along and contiguous to
the Rio Grande River not included in the districts of Laredo and El Paso_

Eagle Pass, Boquillas, Del Rio, Presidio.


ARIZONA—Nogales

_All of the State of Arizona_

Nogales, Naco, Yuma, Douglas.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA—Los Angeles

_All that part of the State of California, lying south of 35° north
latitude_

Los Angeles, San Pedro, San Diego, Calexico, Campo, Tia Juana.


SAN FRANCISCO—San Francisco

_All that part of the State of California lying north of 35° north
latitude_

San Francisco (including Oakland), Eureka, Port Harford.


OREGON—Portland

_All of the State of Oregon_

Portland, Astoria, Newport, Empire.


WASHINGTON—Seattle

_All of the State of Washington_

Seattle, Port Townsend, Aberdeen, Anacortes, Bellingham, Blaine,
Chopaka, Danville, Everett, Ferry, Friday Harbor, Laurier, Molson,
Northport, Port Angeles, Roche Harbor, South Bend, Spokane, Somas,
Tacoma.


ALASKA—Juneau

_All of the Territory of Alaska_

Juneau, Eagle, Ketchikan, Cordova, Sulzer, St. Michael, Skagway,
Unalaska, Wrangell, Fortymile, Fairbanks, Nome.


HAWAII—Honolulu

_All of the territory of Hawaii_

Honolulu, Hilo, Kahului, Kaloa, Mahukona.


MONTANA AND IDAHO—Great Falls

_All of the States of Montana and Idaho_

Great Falls, Eastport, Port Hill, Plentywood, Sweetgrass, Gateway.


DAKOTA—Pembina

_All of the States of North and South Dakota and the county of Kittsen
in the State of Minnesota_

Pembina, Noyes, St. Vincent, Portal, St. John, Hannah, Neche, Ambrose,
Souris, Walhalla, Sarles, Sherwood, Hansboro, Crosby, Antler.


MINNESOTA—St. Paul, Minneapolis

_State of Minnesota, lying south of 46° north latitude_

St. Paul, Minneapolis.


DULUTH AND SUPERIOR—Duluth and Superior

_All of the State of Minnesota, except the county of Kittsen, lying
north of 46° north latitude and all of the State of Wisconsin lying
north of said latitude, and the island of Isle Royal, in the State of
Michigan_

(The port of Duluth and Superior shall include both of said cities
and West Superior)

Duluth, Superior, International Falls, Warroad, Ranier, Two Harbors,
Ashland, Isle Royal.


WISCONSIN—Milwaukee

_All of the State of Wisconsin lying south of 46° north latitude_

Milwaukee, Green Bay, Kenosha, Kewaunee, Manitowoc, Marinette (including
Menominee), Racine, Sheboygan, Sturgeon Bay.


MICHIGAN—Detroit

_All of the State of Michigan_

Detroit, Port Huron, Saginaw, Alpena, Bay City, Marine City, St. Clair,
Grand Rapids, Grand Haven, Charlevoix, Ludington, Manistee, Manistique,
Muskegon, St. Joseph, Petoskey, Sault Ste. Marie, Cheboygan, Mackinaw,
Detour, Escanaba, Gladstone, Houghton, Marquette.


CHICAGO—Chicago

_All of the Stale of Illinois lying north of 39° north latitude and all
that part of the State of Indiana lying north of 41° north latitude_

Chicago, Peoria, Michigan City.


INDIANA—Indianapolis

_All of the State of Indiana lying south of 41° of north latitude_

Indianapolis, Evansville.


OHIO—Cleveland

_All of the State of Ohio and the county of Erie in the State of
Pennsylvania_

Cleveland, Conneaut, Ashtabula, Fairport, Lorain, Sandusky, Put-in-Bay,
Toledo, Cincinnati, Columbus, Dayton and Erie, Corry, Pa.


KENTUCKY—Louisville

_All of the State of Kentucky_

Louisville, Paducah.


TENNESSEE—Memphis

_All of the State of Tennessee_

Memphis, Nashville, Chattanooga, Knoxville.


IOWA—Des Moines

_All of the State of Iowa_

Des Moines, Sioux City, Dubuque.


ST. LOUIS—St. Louis

_All of the States of Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, and all
that part of the State of Illinois lying south of 39° north latitude_

St. Louis (including East St. Louis), Kansas City, Cairo, Ill.,
St. Joseph, Mo.


OMAHA—Omaha

_All of the States of Nebraska and Wyoming_

Omaha, Lincoln.


COLORADO—Denver

_All of the State of Colorado_

Denver.


UTAH AND NEVADA—Salt Lake City

_All of the States of Utah and Nevada_

Salt Lake City.


PORTO RICO—San Juan

_The island of Porto Rico_

San Juan, Humacao, Aguadilla, Mayaguez, Arecibo, Arroyo, Fajardo, Ponce,
Guanica.

       *       *       *       *       *

The use of the terms "port of delivery" and "subport of entry"
has been discontinued, and all ports of entry, sub-ports of entry, and
ports of delivery not above specifically mentioned as ports of entry,
abolished.

The privileges of the first and seventh sections of the act of June
10, 1880, commonly known as the "immediate transportation act,"
remain as heretofore existing with respect to the ports of entry.


Ports at which merchandise may be entered for transportation to other
ports without appraisement under the act of June 10, 1880

  Alburg, Vt.
  Astoria, Ore.
  Baltimore, Md.
  Bangor, Me.
  Bath, Me.
  Bay City, Mich.
  Beecher Falls, Vt.
  Blaine, Wash.
  Boston, Mass.
  Brownsville, Tex.
  Brunswick, Ga.
  Buffalo, N. Y.
  Burlington, Vt.
  Calais, Me.
  Charleston, S. C.
  Chicago, Ill.
  Cleveland, Ohio.
  Detroit, Mich.
  Duluth, Minn.
  Eagle Pass, Tex.
  Eastport, Idaho.
  Eastport, Me.
  El Paso, Tex.
  Everett, Wash.
  Fernandina, Fla.
  Galveston, Tex.
  Gladstone, Mich.
  Honolulu, T. H.
  Island Pond, Vt.
  Key West, Fla.
  Knights Key, Fla.
  Laredo, Tex.
  Los Angeles, Cal.
  Malone, N. Y.
  Marquette, Mich.
  Miami, Fla.
  Milwaukee, Wis.
  Mobile, Ala.
  New London, Conn.
  New Orleans, La.
  Newport, Vt.
  Newport News, Va.
  New York, N. Y.
  Niagara Falls, N. Y.
  Nogales, Ariz.
  Norfolk, Va.
  Nyando, N. Y.
  Ogdensburg, N. Y.
  Pembina, N. Dak.
  Pensacola, Fla.
  Philadelphia, Pa.
  Port Arthur, Tex.
  Port Huron, Mich.
  Portal, N. Dak.
  Portland, Me.
  Portland, Ore.
  Port Townsend, Wash.
  Providence, R. I.
  Ranier, Minn.
  Richford, Vt.
  Rochester, N. Y.
  Rouses Point, N. Y.
  St. Albans, Vt.
  St. Vincent, Minn.
  San Diego, Cal.
  San Francisco, Cal.
  Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.
  Savannah, Ga.
  Seattle, Wash.
  Sioux City, Iowa.
  Sumas, Wash.
  Tacoma, Wash.
  Tampa, Fla.
  Texas City, Tex.
  Toledo, Ohio.
  Van Buren, Me.
  Vanceboro, Me.
  Wilmington, N. C.


Ports to which merchandise may be transported without appraisement
under the act of June 10, 1880

  Albany, N. Y.
  Astoria, Ore.
  Atlanta, Ga.
  Baltimore, Md.
  Bangor, Me.
  Bath, Me.
  Bellingham, Wash.
  Birmingham, Ala.
  Boston, Mass.
  Bridgeport, Conn.
  Buffalo, N. Y.
  Burlington, Vt.
  Calais, Me.
  Charleston, S. C.
  Chattanooga, Tenn.
  Chicago, Ill.
  Cincinnati, Ohio.
  Cleveland, Ohio.
  Coal City, Ill.
  Columbus, Ohio.
  Corry, Pa.
  Council Bluffs, Iowa.
  Dallas, Tex.
  Dayton, Ohio.
  Denver, Colo.
  Des Moines, Iowa.
  Detroit, Mich.
  Dubuque, Iowa.
  Duluth, Minn.
  Dunkirk, N. Y.
  Durango, Colo.
  Durham, N. C.
  Eagle Pass, Tex.
  Eastport, Me.
  El Paso, Tex.
  Enfield, Conn.
  Erie, Pa.
  Evansville, Ind.
  Everett, Wash.
  Fall River, Mass.
  Galveston, Tex.
  Gladstone, Mich.
  Gloucester, Mass.
  Grand Haven, Mich.
  Grand Rapids, Mich.
  Green Bay, Wis.
  Greenwich, Conn.
  Hartford, Conn.
  Honolulu, Hawaii.
  Houston, Tex.
  Indianapolis, Ind.
  Jacksonville, Fla.
  Kansas City, Mo.
  Key West, Fla.
  Knoxvile, Tenn.
  Laredo, Tex.
  Leadville, Colo.
  Lincoln, Nebr.
  Los Angeles, Cal.
  Louisville, Ky.
  Marquette, Mich.
  Memphis, Tenn.
  Middletown, Conn.
  Milwaukee, Wis.
  Minneapolis, Minn.
  Mobile, Ala.
  Nashville, Tenn.
  Newark, N. J.
  New Bedford, Mass.
  New Haven, Conn.
  New Orleans, La.
  Newport, R. I.
  Newport News, Va.
  New York, N. Y.
  Niagara Falls, N. Y.
  Nogales, Ariz.
  Norfolk, Va.
  Norwalk, Conn.
  Oakland, Cal.
  Ocala, Fla.
  Ogdensburg, N. Y.
  Omaha, Nebr.
  Peoria, Ill.
  Perth Amboy, N. J.
  Petersburg, Va.
  Petoskey, Mich.
  Philadelphia, Pa.
  Pittsburgh, Pa.
  Port Arthur, Tex.
  Port Huron, Mich.
  Portland, Me.
  Portland, Ore.
  Portsmouth, N. H.
  Port Townsend, Wash.
  Providence, R. I.
  Pueblo, Colo.
  Richmond, Va.
  Rochester, N. Y.
  St. Augustine, Fla.
  St. Joseph, Mo.
  St. Louis, Mo.
  St. Paul, Minn.
  Sabine Pass, Tex.
  Saginaw, Mich.
  Salt Lake City, Utah.
  San Antonio, Tex.
  San Diego, Cal.
  Sandusky, Ohio.
  San Francisco, Cal.
  Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.
  Savannah, Ga.
  Seattle, Wash.
  Sioux City, Iowa.
  South Manchester, Conn.
  Spokane, Wash.
  Springfield, Mass.
  Stamford, Conn.
  Superior, Wis.
  Syracuse, N. Y.
  Tacoma, Wash.
  Tampa, Fla.
  Titusville, Pa.
  Toledo, Ohio.
  Utica, N. Y.
  Vanceboro, Me.
  Vernon (Rockville), Conn.
  Washington, D. C.
  Wilmington, Del.
  Wilmington, N. C.
  Worcester, Mass.


List of ports at which bonded warehouses are established

  Apalachicola, Fla.
  Atlanta, Ga.
  Baltimore, Md.
  Bangor, Me.
  Bath, Me.
  Belfast, Me.
  Bonners Ferry, Mont.
  Boothbay, Me.
  Boston, Mass.
  Bridgeport, Conn.
  Brownsville, Tex.
  Buffalo, N. Y.
  Burlington, Vt.
  Cape Vincent, N. Y.
  Castine, Me.
  Chattanooga, Tenn.
  Chicago, Ill.
  Cincinnati, Ohio.
  Denver, Colo.
  Detroit, Mich.
  Duluth, Minn.
  Durham, N. C.
  Eagle Pass, Tex.
  Eastport, Me.
  El Paso, Tex.
  Erie, Pa.
  Evansville, Ind.
  Everett, Wash.
  Fall River, Mass.
  Galveston, Tex.
  Gloucester, Mass.
  Grand Rapids, Mich.
  Great Falls, Mont.
  Green Bay, Wis.
  Hartford, Conn.
  Honolulu, Hawaii.
  Indianapolis, Ind.
  Kansas City, Mo.
  Key West, Fla.
  Laredo, Tex.
  Lincoln, Nebr.
  Los Angeles, Cal.
  Louisville, Ky.
  Minneapolis, Minn.
  New Haven, Conn.
  New London, Conn.
  New Orleans, La.
  Newport News, Va.
  Newark, N. J.
  New York.
  Niagara Falls, N. Y.
  Nogales, Ariz.
  Ogdensburg, N. Y.
  Omaha, Nebr.
  Oswego, N. Y.
  Pensacola, Fla.
  Perth Amboy, N. J.
  Petersburg, Va.
  Philadelphia, Pa.
  Pittsburgh, Pa.
  Plattsburg, N. Y.
  Port Huron, Mich.
  Portland, Me.
  Portland, Ore.
  Portsmouth, N. H.
  Port Townsend, Wash.
  Providence, R. I.
  Provincetown, Mass.
  Richmond, Va.
  Rochester, N. Y.
  St. Joseph, Mo.
  St. Louis, Mo.
  St. Michael, Alaska.
  St. Paul, Minn.
  Saginaw, Mich.
  Salem, Mass.
  San Antonio, Tex.
  San Diego, Cal.
  San Francisco, Cal.
  San Juan, P. R.
  Savannah, Ga.
  Seattle, Wash.
  Sioux City, Iowa.
  Skagway, Alaska.
  Spokane, Wash.
  Syracuse, N. Y.
  Tacoma, Wash.
  Tampa, Fla.
  Toledo, Ohio.
  Utica, N. Y.


List of ports where the custom-house premises are used for the storage
of imported goods in bond

  Albany, N. Y.
  Aguadilla, P. R.
  Arecibo, P. R.
  Arroyo, P. R.
  Bangor, Me.
  Charleston, S. C.
  Cleveland, Ohio.
  Columbus, Ohio.
  Fajardo, P. R.
  Guanica, P. R.
  Humacao, P. R.
  Jacksonville, Fla.
  Marquette, Mich.
  Mayaguez, P. R.
  Memphis, Tenn.
  Milwaukee, Wis.
  Nashville, Tenn.
  Norfolk, Va.
  Peoria, Ill.
  Ponce, P. R.
  Providence, R. I.
  Rochester, N. Y.
  St. Augustine, Fla.
  Sandusky, Ohio.
  San Juan, P. R.
  Springfield, Mass.
  Washington, D. C. (Georgetown)
  Wilmington, Del.




APPENDIX B

THE SEA LIBRARY


The books an officer should have, _and study_, are appended.

 Bowditch's American Practical Navigator.
  The Navigator's Bible.

 Lecky's Wrinkles in Practical Navigation.
  No comment needed. An officer who does not know this book—well,
  he is simply not all there as an officer.

 Bradford's Whys and Wherefores of Navigation.
  An American book, of intimate and interesting information on the
  subject of navigation. If you want to know "why," own and study
  Bradford, it is a book for the man who likes to thoroughly understand
  his subject—simple, clear, complete.

 Jacoby's Navigation.
  A good book for the beginner.

 Knight's Seamanship.
  The best American work on seamanship, naval and merchant service. The
  chapters on ship handling and the higher problems of seamanship are
  exceptionally good.

 Todd and Whall's Seamanship.
  The best book to date for the merchantman.

 Walton's Know Your Own Ship.
  Information about vessels that every officer aboard ship should
  possess.

 White's Oil Tank Steamers.
  An excellent work by an officer who knows his subject.

 Allingham's Weather Signs and How to Read Them.




Index


Page numbers in bold-face type indicate reference to the Navigation Laws.


A

 Abandonment of seamen, +297+

 Able seamen, duties, 236-240

 Advance, +265+

 Agreement, form of, +241-242+
   in coasting trade, +256+
   in foreign trade, +249+, +250+

 Allingham, 304

 Allotment of wages, +265+, +266+, +267+

 Alongside, 96

 Amendments to Rule V, +155+

 Amplitudes, 181

 Anchor watch, 74

 Anchorage data, 73

 Anchoring, 95

 Application for register, +9+

 Apprentices, +244+, +248+, +249+

 Arbitration, +270+

 Arms, export to American countries, +61+
   sale of, +62+

 Arson, 295

 Assault, +293+

 Assistance at sea, +62+, +63+

 Average, general, +51+, +52+

 Awnings, 77


B

 Baggage, 129

 Barratry, +298+

 Berth, fair or foul, 75

 Bills of lading, 75, 84

 Boarding, +24+, +25+, +26+

 Boat covers, 77
   falls, +108+
   handling, +105+

 Boatswain, 78
   duties, 234, 235

 Boatswain's stores, 77

 Bond, general libel, +57+, +58+

 Books, 304

 Bowditch, 304

 Bradford, 304

 Bribery, +50+, +51+

 Bridge, persons allowed on, +170+

 Bullion and coin, +21+

 Buoys, +111+


C

 Cadets, laws, duties, +145+

 Captain, call, 179

 Cargo, battens, 79
   care of, 82
   chilled beef, 87
   comparison of cargo and manifest, +39+
   clusters, 74, 75
   coal-trimming, 85
   coal-ventilation, 85
   cotton, 86
   damage to, 83
   delivery in various districts, +33+, +34+
   diagrams, 75, 84
   duty to, 82
   explosive, +65+, +66+, +67+, +68+, +69+, +70+, +71+

 Cargo, frozen, 87
   gear, 75, 80
   general, 87, 88
   grain, 86
   in bulk, +31+
   inflammable, +65+, +66+, +67+, +68+, +69+, +70+, +71+
   kinds, 84
   munitions, 89
   ore, 85
   pilfering, 83
   re-export, +31+
   returns of unlading, +47, 48+
   special, 88
   stowage, 83
   ventilation, 84
   wet coal, 85

 Carpenter, 73, 78
   duties, 231-232, 233
   stores, 77

 Cask fenders, 74

 Casting away vessels, +299+

 Ceiling, 79

 Chafe, 74

 Chief Mate, the, 72
   coastwise, +162+
   duties, 73, 74, 75
   duties at sea, 100, 101, 102
   duties in port, 78
   examination, +161+
   License, +149+
   qualifications, 72
   reports for duty, 72
   service, +159+
   Vessel in stream, 73

 Charts, pilot, 181

 Clearance, form of, +20+

 Clothing, exempt from attachment, +267+

 Coal, +35+

 Coaling, 97
   gear, 77

 Cork fenders, 74

 Cost data, 89

 Collision, 175

 Coming alongside, 96
   to anchor, 95

 Complaints re provisions, +12+

 Construction, future, +105+

 Conventions, +269+

 Corporal punishment, +290+

 Crew, 76
   failure to produce, +253+
   ill treatment of, +297+
   papers relating to, +254+
   quarters, inspection, 75

 Crimes, +291-300+


D

 Dangerous conditions, 176

 Davits, test of, +106+, +107+

 Death from negligence, +169+
   negligence, misconduct, +294+

 Deck, 178
   crew, 78
   engineer, 73
   room, +115+

 Delivery, ports of, +29+, App. A

 Desertion, abroad, +268+
   of foreign seamen in U. S., +268+

 Discharge, +245+

 Discharging, 75

 Discharge in foreign ports, +258+
   in foreign trade, +257+

 Discipline at sea, 286-287

 Distress, vessels in, +48+, +49+

 Docking, notes on, 99, 100

 Docking plan, 98

 Dodgers, 77

 Draft, 75

 Drift lead, 74

 Dry dock, entering, 98
   blue prints, 98


E

 Engagement, period of, +251+

 Engineer's license, 150

 Entry and clearance, +18+
   of merchandise, +27+, +38+
   Ports of, +28+, App. A
   post, +47+

 Examinations, Chief and second mate coastwise, +164+
   master, +156+
   original license, +153+
   Third mate coastwise, +165+

 Exemption, militia duty, +241+
   of private property at sea, +62+

 Export of arms, +61+
   merchandise laden for, +32+
   transfer of imported merchandise, +32+


F

 Fees, +21+

 Fellow-servant clause, +283+

 Fire-fighting equipment, 92

 Fire lines, 75

 Fire, protection against, +63+, +64+, +65+

 Flogging, +290+

 Forgery, +296+

 Freeboard, 83


G

 Gangway, 74

 General average, +51-52+

 General libel bond, +57+, +58+

 Great Lakes, licenses, +166+
   crimes on, +300+

 Ground tackle, 94

 Gun, drill with line carrying, +113+
   line carrying, +112+
   tests, +112+


H

 Harbor defenses, +61+
   regulations, 92

 Harter Act, +55+, +56+, +57+

 Hatch battens, 76
   covers, 76

 Hawsers, 77

 Heaving in, 95
   lines, 74

 Holds, 75
   preparation to receive cargo, 78, 79, 80

 Hose, on foc's'le, 73


I

 Ice, 176
   obstruction by, +49+

 Illegal boarding, +24+
   unlading, +39+, +40+

 Inland licenses, +165+
   Rules of road, +185-222+
   waters—limits, +222-228+

 Inspection of inward manifests by boarding officers, +35+, +36+, +37+,
   +38+

 Instructions for gun and rocket apparatus, +113+

 Insurance, war risk, +283+, +284+, +285+

 International Rules of Road, +184-220+

 Inventories, 76

 Invoices, 84


J

 Jacoby, navigation, 304

 Junior officers, duties, 133

 Jurisdiction over seamen, +277+, +278+, +279+


K

 Keys, 92

 Keys, master, 92

 Knight, 304


L

 Larceny, +295+

 Laws effecting duties of master, 9

 Lecky, 304

 Log books, +15+, +16+, +17+

 Look out, 176

 Liability of owners, masters, shippers, +53+, +54+, +55+

 Libel bond, general, +57+, +58+

 Licenses, duration of, +147+
   renewal of, +154+

 Liens for freight or general average, +51+, +52+

 Lifeboats, care of, +108+
   equipment, +103+
   how carried, +105+
   launching, +108+
   manning, +108-109+
   marking of, +107+
   men, certificated, +108-109+
   provisions, +104+

 Life buoys, ring, +111+
   preservers, +111+
   rafts, equipment, +110+
     care of, +110+
     manning, +109+
     marking, +110+
   saving equipment, 77, 94 105

 Lighters, 73

 Lights, running, 179

 Live stock, 90

 Lodgers, +270+

 Luminous buoys, +111+


M

 Mail, 129

 Manifest, +18+, +19+, +20+, +27+, +28+, +30+, +31+

 Manning of merchant vessels, +280+, +281+, +282+

 Manslaughter, +292+

 Mast covers, 77

 Master, the, +1+
   acting as pilot, +151+
   always in command, 4
   articles, 2
   authority over pilot, 4
   authority to protect lives and property, 8

 Master, authority to suspend officers, 8
   cannot delegate responsibility, 4
   certificate of inspection, 7
   change of, +9+
   charter, 4
   coaling, 2
   coastwise, 157
   correct lading, 3
   course of vessel, 7
   declaration of, +29+, +30+
   delivery of specie and cargo, 3
   departure, 7
   disaster, 8
   drills, 7
   duties, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
   enters and clears, 3
   examination, +156+
   general management of vessel, 2
   insurance, 3
   keeps official log, 2
   keeps wage account, 4
   last to leave ship, 8
   laws, must be familiar with, 3
     of port, 5
   liability, +53+, +54+, +55+, +169+
   license, +149+
   licensed engineer officer on duty, 3
   licensed officer always in charge, 4
   live stock, 5
   maneuvering vessel, 3
   medicine chest, 3
   navigator, 5
   navigation laws, 8
   oath-manifest, +18+
   oath of citizenship, +9+
   official log book, 5
   passengers, 4, 7
   property of deceased persons, 7
   punishments to crew, 5
   qualifications, 2
   removal of, +152+
   report to U. S. Local Inspectors, 7
   represents owner, 4
   report on accidents, 7
   responsibilities, +1+, 2, 4
   rules of road, 5
   safe carrying of mail, 4
     navigation, 2
   sail, 158
   scale of provisions, 3
   service required, +155+
   ship's log book, 7
   ship must be well found, 2
   skill, 8
   slop chest, 3
   smuggling, 5

 Mate, acting as pilot, +151+

 Mayhem, +294+

 Medicines and anti-scorbutics, +14+

 Merchandise, fraudulent importation, +50+
   salvage of, +49+, +55+
   vessels, manning, +280+, +282+, +282+

 Mines, +61+, +62+

 Miscellaneous laws, +59+

 Mooring lines, 73, 74

 Murder, +292+

 Muster-list roll and drill, +114-115+

 Mutiny, +297+


N

 Navigation, 304

 Navigating gear, 77
   officer, 129-130

 Navy ration, +60+, +61+

 Night orders, 176, +177+, +178+


O

 Oath of officer, +151+

 Offenses, +287+, +288+, +289+

 Offenses against registry law, +9+
   miscellaneous, +296+

 Officer's citizenship, +146+
   license, +148, 149+
   serving during war, +148+

 Orders, night, 178
   standing, 177

 Owner's liability, +53+, +54+, +55+
   may ship seamen, +248+


P

 Pacific Islanders, sale of arms to, +62+

 Painting, bottom, 99

 Paints, 77

 Papers, deposit of, +21+

 Passengers, 90

 Passenger accommodations, +116+, +117+, +118+, +119+
   Act of 1882, +116+
   vessel, boarding, +124+
   steamer, cattle on board, +123+
   carriage of, +126+
   cleanliness, +122+
   death of, +125+
   discipline, +122+
   embarkation in boats and rafts, +108+
   steamer, explosives on board, +123+
     inspection, +125+
   light and air, +119+, +120+
   list, +124+
   medical attendance, +121+, +122+
   act, penalties, +125-126+
   privacy, +122-123+
   provisions, +121+

 Passports, +22-23+

 Permit to unlade by night, +40+, +41+, +42+

 Pilot's license, +151+

 Piracy, +300+, +301+, +302+, +303+

 Plundering vessel, +299+

 Pilot, must yield to master, +4+

 Ports of entry, +29+, App. A

 Post entry, +47+

 Provisions, scale of, +243+

 Provisions and water, +11+

 Private property, exemption at sea, +62+

 Procedure, +290+

 Projectiles, line carrying, _113_

 Propeller signs, 74

 Protection against fire, +63+, +64+, +65+

 Punishments, +287+, +288+, +289+


Q

 Quartermasters, 78, 182
   duties, 229-230


R

 Rafts, handling, +105+

 Rape, +293+

 Rat guards, 75, 97

 Ration, navy, +60+, +61+

 Reduction of allowance, +13+

 Responsibility, watch officers, 172

 Riding lights, 74

 Robbery, +295+

 Rockets, +112+

 Rose boxes, 79

 Rules of road, 173, +184-221+

 Rule, unwritten, 174


S

 Sails, 77

 Sale of arms to Pacific Islanders, +62+

 Salvage at sea, +62+, +63+

 Salvage of merchandise, +49+, +50+

 School ships, +59+, +60+

 Sea letters, +22+, +23+

 Sea library, 304

 Seamen, abandonment of, +297+
   effects of deceased, +272-276+
   naturalization of, +245+

 Seamen, rescuing shipwrecked American, +59+
   return of, +271+
   shipment in coasting trade, +255+
   sick and disabled, +276+, +277+
   witness fees, +279+

 Search, +24+, +25+, +26+

 Sea stores, +34+, +35+

 Second mate, 78, 128, 129, 160, +161+, +163+

 Seduction, +293+

 Service, substituting, +155+

 Sheath knives, +289+

 Shipment, before consul, +252+

 Shipment without agreement, penalty, +251+

 Shipments, illegal, +247+

 Shipper's liability, +53+, +54+, +55+

 Shipping commissioner, +270+

 Shipping officers, +246+

 Ship's register, +9+
   school, +59, 60+

 Shipwrecked American seamen rescuing, +59+

 Side ladders, +74+
   screens, 77

 Signal gear, 77

 Skids, 74

 Slop chest, +14+

 Smoke helmets, 87

 Smothering lines, 79

 Solicitation of bribes, +50+, +51+

 Soliciting lodgers, +270+

 Sounding pipes, 76

 Stairways, +115+

 State inspection laws, +20+

 Station bill, 75, 76

 Steamer's name on equipment, +114+

 Steel strongbacks, 76

 Stevedores, 82

 Stolen property, +295+

 Stores, receiving, 92

 Storm oil, +113+

 Supervising Inspector General, Recommendations, 180


T

 Tank steamers, 90-91

 Tarpaulins, 76, 77

 Telegraph, 73

 Third mate, 78, 131, 132, +161+, +162+, +164+

 Todd and Whall, 304

 Torpedoes, +61+

 Treaties, +269+

 Trial, place of, +291+

 Turning to, 92, 93

 Twin screws, 74


U

 Undermanning, +283+

 Unloading by day, +42+, +43+
   by night, +40+
   supervision of, +43+, +44+, +45+
   time limit for, +46+

 Upkeep, 93

 Unseaworthy vessels, +283+

 U. S. Local Inspectors, 7
   Supervising Inspectors, rules relating to life saving, +103+


V

 Ventilator covers, 77

 Vessel alongside, 74
   casting away, +299+

 Vessels, different types, 76
   exempt from entry, +34+
   in distress, +48+, +49+

 Vessels, overtaken, 179
   plundering, +299+
   unseaworthy, +283+


W

 Wages, +260+-265
   exempt from attachment, +267+

 Walton, 304

 War documents, +22+, +23+

 Warmth and clothing, +15+

 War risk insurance, +283+, +284+, +285+

 War zone, 179
   precautions, +105+

 Waterline, striking, 100

 Water plugs, 75

 Watch officer, 167
   duty, 167
     in port, 183
     not citizens, +147+

 Watch-relieving, +170+
   rest before going on, +169+

 Watches, three, +168+

 Wedges, 76

 Weights and measures, +13+
   of persons, +107+

 Whistle signals, 81

 White, 304

 Windlass notes, 73

 Wooden steamers, 86
   warehouse, 74

 Working boat, 74
   cargo, 81

 Work of Chief mate, 76

 Wrecking, +298+


Z

 Zig-zag, +180+




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_


UNDER SAIL

A narrative of the old square-rigger sailing ship days, detailing the
story of a voyage around Cape Horn to Honolulu and back to New York in
the American three skysail yarder A. J. Fuller in 1897-8.

_IN PRESS_




THE LITERATURE _of_ NAVAL AND MARINE SCIENCE

On our shelves is the most complete stock of technical, industrial,
engineering and scientific books in the United States. The technical
literature of every branch of naval architecture, construction,
ordnance, marine engineering, seamanship and navigation is well
represented, as well as are the various other related subjects.

A large number of these we publish and for an ever increasing number we
are the sole agents.

[Illustration: Publisher's Mark]

_All Our Inquiries are Cheerfully and Carefully Answered and Complete
Catalogs as well as Special Lists are Sent Free on Request_

 D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY
 _Publishers and Booksellers_
 25 PARK PLACE
 NEW YORK


VAN NOSTRAND'S NAUTICAL MANUALS

 175 Pages
 5 × 7½
 Postpaid, $2.00

 The Whys and Wherefores
 of
 Navigation

 By
 GERSHOM BRADFORD, 2d.
 Navigating Officer and Senior Instructor
 New York State Nautical Schoolship Newport
 Late Nautical Expert
 Hydrographic Office, U.S.N.

CONTENTS: Nautical Astronomy. Declination. Right Ascension.
Precession of the Equinoxes. Time. Sidereal Time. Equation of Time.
Calendar. Corrections for Observed Altitude. Index Correction.
Semi-diameter. Refraction. Dip. Parallax. Circum or Ex-Meridian
Altitude. Polaris. Observations for the Correction of the Compass.
Longitude. Sumner Method. The New Navigation. The Moon. Charts.

_An American book of intimate and interesting information on the
subject of Navigation. If you want to know "why," own and study
Bradford. It is a book for the man who likes to understand his subject
thoroughly—simple, clear, complete._


VAN NOSTRAND'S MILITARY BOOKS

 231 Pages
 51 Plates—Many in Colors
 Pocket Size
 Price $1.00

MILITARY and NAVAL RECOGNITION BOOK

_A handbook on the organization, insignia of rank, and customs of the
service of the World's Important Armies and Navies._

 BY
 Lieut. J. W. BUNKLEY
 U. S. Navy

A complete, correct and fully illustrated guide to the insignia of our
army and navy as well as of those of the nations engaged in the war,
compiled from official sources and useful alike to civilians as well as
to the Army and Navy.

You will need this book to help you recognize our boys at home and to
distinguish the other boys "over there."

 D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY
 HEADQUARTERS SINCE 1860
 _for_
 MILITARY AND NAVAL BOOKS
 _25 Park Place_
 _NEW YORK_


VAN NOSTRAND'S NAVAL BOOKS

 730 Pages
 6¼ × 9¼
 Postpaid $6.50
 159 Full Page Plates
 10 Color Plates

 Modern Seamanship
 By
 Admiral Austin M. Knight, U. S. N.

 SEVENTH EDITION
 REVISED AND ENLARGED

_CONTENTS_—The Hull and Fittings of a Ship. Rope. Knotting and
Splicing. Mechanical Appliances on Shipboard. Blocks and Tackles.
Handling Heavy Weights. Compass. Log and Lead. Submarine Signals. Boats.
Handling Boats in a Surf. Ground Tackle. Carrying Out Anchors. The
Steering of Steamers. The Rules of the Road. Manoeuvering to Avoid
Collision. Piloting. Handling a Steamer Alongside a Dock. Placing a Ship
in a Dry Dock. Weather and the Laws of Storms. Handling Steamers in
Heavy Weather. The Handling of Torpedo Vessels. Keeping Stations and
Manoeuvring in Squadron. Towing. Rescuing the Crew of a Wreck. Man
Overboard. Stranding. Hints for Junior Officers Doing Line Duty.
Appendix.

_The official text book at the U. S. Naval Academy and in use
throughout the service. Describes the handling of all vessels,
men-of-war, merchantmen, naval auxiliaries and small boats._


VAN NOSTRAND'S NAUTICAL MANUALS

 150 Illustrations
 5 × 7½
 about 400 pp.
 In Press

 HANDBOOK
 FOR THE CARE AND OPERATION OF
 NAVAL MACHINERY

 By Comm. H. C. DINGER, U. S. Navy

 Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged
 by Lieut. Comm. H. T. Dyer, U.S.N.

This new, revised and enlarged edition will be of use to all engineers
and will help any one that has to do with nautical matters. The
explanations and definitions are so plain that save in a few cases the
layman can take up the book and by reading the section he is interested
in can understand the point at once. Special care has been exercised to
cover all points dealing with the usage on United States vessels. A
glance at the book will show the infinite number of things that must be
attended to by the engineer, who nowadays is the main factor in the
ship's welfare.

 D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY
 _Publishers and Booksellers_
 25 PARK PLACE
 NEW YORK








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEN ON DECK: MASTER, MATES AND CREW, THEIR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


