The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Complete Manual of Catholic Piety
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Complete Manual of Catholic Piety

Author: William Gahan

Release date: August 20, 2020 [eBook #62988]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Don Kostuch


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE MANUAL OF CATHOLIC PIETY ***

[Transcriber's notes: This work is derived from
https://archive.org/details/CompleteManualOfCatholicPiety/page/n5.
The Author's Side notes and comments are indented. In HTML they are
also in a slightly smaller font, as in the original text.]



{1}

    The  Complete Manual Of Catholic Piety;

                  Containing

         A Selection Of Fervent Prayers,
    Pious Reflections, And Solid Instructions,
         Adapted To Every State Of Life.



         To Which Is Annexed A Supplement,
         Containing Excellent And Approved
         Devotions, With The Epistles And
         Gospels For All The Sundays And
         Festivals Of The Year.



       By The Rev. William Gahan, O.S.A.



                     DUBLIN:

            Published By James Duffy,
               25, Anglesea Street.
                      1844.

{2}


                      Dublin:
              Printed By J. M. O'Toole,
                 33, Abbey-street.

{3}

                     Contents.



Preface, -- 7.

Table of Moveable Feasts, -- 10.

Feasts and Fasts throughout the Year, -- 11.

Unlawful Marriages, -- 12.

Plenary Indulgences, -- 12.

Manner of Lay Baptism, -- 14.

Ecclesiastical Calendar, -- 14.

Morning Prayer, -- 25.

Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, -- 30.

The Litany of the holy Name of Jesus, -- 33.

The _Salva Regina_,--in verse, -- 36.

The _Angelus Domini_, -- 37.

Short Ejaculations in the course of the Day, -- 38.

Prayers for Night, -- 39.

The Litany of the Blessed Virgin, -- 44.

The Hymn, _Te lucis ante terminum_, -- in English, -- 47.

A Prayer before Sermon, Spiritual Reading, &c. -- 49.

A Prayer before Mass, -- 50.

Prayers at Mass, -- 56.

Preparation for Confession, -- 80.

A Protestation before the Examination of Conscience, -- 81.

Prayers before the Examination of Conscience, -- 82.

An Examination of Conscience, -- 85.

Prayers before Confession, -- 92.

A Prayer at receiving Absolution, -- 97.

Prayers after Confession, -- 98.

Instructions for Communion, -- 103.

Prayers before Communion, -- 107.

Acts of Virtue before Communion, -- 111.

{4}

A Prayer to obtain the effects of a Plenary Indulgence, -- 118.

Prayers after Communion, -- 124.

Acts of Virtue after Communion, -- 130.

The Seven Penitential Psalms, -- 141.

The Litany of Saints, -- 150.

Motives to Perseverance in a Virtuous Life, -- 158.

Devotions for every Day in the Week, -- 160.

Pious Reflections for every Day in the Month; from the
  French of the Rev. F. Bouhours, -- 171.

Meditations on the Articles of the Creed--to be used as a
  Devotion by Societies, Families, &c, -- 210.

Anthem of the Blessed Virgin, _Salve Regina_, -- 224.

An Universal Prayer for all things necessary to Salvation, -- 225.

A Prayer for the Choice of a State of Life, -- 227.

A Prayer for a Pregnant Woman, -- 227.

Litany of Divine Providence, -- 229.

Prayer of St. Bernard to the Blessed Virgin, -- 232.

Litany of St. Winefrid, -- 233.

The Golden Litany, -- 239.

The Prayers of St. Bridget, -- 247.

Devotions to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, -- 258.

Litany of the Sacred Heart, -- 259.

Reparation of Honour to the Sacred Heart, -- 262.

Devotions for the Sick, -- 264.

A Prayer upon Recovery from Sickness, -- 277.

Preparation for Death, -- 278.

A Prayer by St. Liguori, -- 291.

A Prayer of St. Augustin on the Sufferings of Christ, -- 292.

A Prayer of St. Jerome in time of Agony, -- 293.

Prayers to be recited by the Assistants when the Dying Person
  loses the use of Speech, -- 294.

Recommendation of a Soul Departing, -- 298.

Litany for a Happy Death, -- 305.

A Prayer for all that are buried in a Church or Church-yard, -- 309.

Exequies, or Sacred Rites over the Tomb, (in Latin and
  English), -- 310.

Litany for the Dead, -- 316.

A Prayer upon the day of Decease or Burial, -- 320.

Vespers for Sundays, (in Latin and English), -- 321.

The Hymn, _Lucis Creator Optime_, (Latin and English), -- 326.

Litany of the Blessed Virgin, (in Latin), -- 328.

Method of Serving at Mass, -- 330.

{5}

                    Supplement.

On the Mass, and the use of the Latin Liturgy, -- 336.

The Ordinary of the Holy Mass, -- 340.

Explanatory Prayers at Mass, -- 367.

Epistles and Gospels for the Sundays and Principal Festivals
   throughout the Year, -- 388.

Instructions and Devotions for Confirmation, -- 482.

The Psalter of Jesus, -- 492.

The Rosary of the blessed Name of Jesus, -- 503.

The Rosary of the Blessed Virgin, -- 510.

The Hymn, _Te Deum_, (in English), -- 521.

The Thirty Days' Prayer, -- 522.

Hymns for Festivals, (in Latin and English)

  Advent, _Alma Redemptor_, -- 527.

  Christmas, _Adeste Fidelis_, -- 527.

  Passion and Palm-Sundays, _Vexilla regis_, -- 528.

  Good-Friday, _Stabat mater_, -- 529.

  Easter, _O Filii_, -- 532.

  Whit-Sunday, _Veni Creator_, -- 534.

  Sequence to do., _Veni Sancte_, -- 536.

  Corpus Christi, _Pange lingua_, -- 538.

  At the Elevation, _O Salutaris_, -- 540.

{6}

{7}

                   Preface.



Of all the means we can employ for our advancement in the great
affair of our salvation, Prayer is certainly one of the most
powerful. Saint Augustin calls it the Key of Heaven, that unlocks
the treasures of God, and gives us free access to the riches of
his divine bounty. It was by prayer that Elias, when he pleased,
opened and shut the sluices of heaven, and caused fire to descend
from above to consume his sacrifice. It was by prayer that Joshua
caused the sun to stop in the midst of its course. The prayer of
Moses contributed more to the signal victory obtained by Joshua
over the army of the Amalekites, than all the weapons of Israel:
for as long as his hands were raised up to heaven, his prayers
drew down a blessing on the people of God: but no sooner did he
let his hands fall, (being unable to keep them in that painful
posture,) and had ceased from prayer, than the Amalekites began
to prevail.

But if Prayer be so powerful, it is no less necessary: our
poverty and indigence; our manifold wants, infirmities, and
miseries; the various dangers to which we are continually
exposed; the frequent temptations we have to encounter; our
absolute insufficiency of ourselves, and inability to do the
least good without the grace of God; are corroborating proofs of
the indispensable necessity of Prayer.

{8}

Though every good gift comes from the Father of Lights, who knows
our wants, and is always inclined to relieve us, yet he requires
that we have recourse in all our necessities, corporal and
spiritual, to the throne of his mercy, under the assurance that
whatever we ask with confidence, humility, piety, and
perseverance, in the name of Jesus, shall be granted.

However, the idea of Prayer is not to be confined to that of
Petition, as frequently happens. Many Christians, indeed, pray to
God; but where are they to be found, who, like David, are
incessantly employed in singing the mercies of the Lord, and have
the remembrance of them deeply engraven in their hearts? They
call upon God, to represent to him their wants, either temporal
or spiritual; they appear only in his presence with a hand lifted
up to receive, as if they imagined he was indebted to them, and
that he never gave them enough. They have a heart but to wish,
and a tongue but to ask. Their wants are eloquent and pressing,
their gratitude cold and silent; for how seldom do they think of
appearing before him to bless and praise him, and to celebrate
the wonders of his love for us! Alas! to recollect his benefits,
to thank him for them, to feel confused at the sight of their own
ingratitude, to excite themselves, from this motive, to
confidence and love, to be ready to do all, to suffer all, for a
God who has shown them so much goodness, is a practice which is
known but to a small number of fervent souls. We are all earnest
in asking; but in general so deficient in thanksgiving, that,
like the Lepers in the Gospel, it is to be feared not above one
in ten gives due thanks to God for the blessings received.

{9}

Nevertheless, nothing would be more pleasing to God, nor more
proper to draw down upon us new graces.

To facilitate, therefore, the exercise of this important duty,
certain forms of vocal prayers have always been recommended,
particularly such as have been used by the Saints, and drawn from
the divine Psalms, which are so full of sublime ideas, of tender
sentiments of piety, of fervent aspirations, of transports and
raptures in God, that all the subjects of Prayer which are
suitable either to the penitent way, the illuminative way, or the
unitive way, are to be met with therein.

The Manual now offered to the piety of Irish Catholics, will be
found, on a diligent perusal, to have no small claim to this
merit. The many editions it has gone through, the high esteem it
is held in by interior souls, the constant and universal demand
for it, is all we shall say in its praise.

To render it still more acceptable and more complete, the present
edition has been very considerably enlarged, improved, and
enriched with Instructions and Devotions for Confirmation; with
an explanation of the Latin Liturgy, and of the Ceremonies used
in the sacrifice of the Mass, and different pious methods of
assisting thereat; with particular Devotions for every day in the
Week; in short, with a great variety of Sacred Hymns of praise
and thanksgiving, and of spiritual Exercises of Piety for several
occasions, taken from the most approved Books of Devotion in the
French and English Language. [Footnote 1]

    [Footnote 1: See the Supplement attached to this Book.]

{10}

              A Table Of Moveable Feasts.

DL = Dominical Letter

Year    DL   Ash     Easter  Ascension  Whit     Corpus   1st Sunday
of our       Wed     Sunday  Thursday   Sunday   Christi  in Advent.
Lord

1844    GF  21 Feb    7 Apr   16 May    26 May   6 June    1 Dec
1845    E    5 Feb   23 Mar    1 May    11 May   22 May   30 Nov
1846    D   25 Feb   12 Apr   21 May    31 May   11 June  29 Nov
1847    C   17 Feb    4 Apr   13 May    23 May    8 June  28 Nov
1848   BA    8 Mar   23 Apr    1 June   11 June  22 June   3 Dec
1849    G   21 Feb    8 Apr   17 May    27 May    7 June   2 Dec
1850    F   13 Feb   31 Mar    9 May    19 May   30 May    1 Dec
1851    E    5 Mar   20 Apr   29 May     8 June  19 June  30 Nov
1852   DC   25 Feb   11 Apr   20 May    30 May   10 June  28 Nov
1853    B    9 Feb   27 Mar    5 May    15 May   26 May   27 Nov
1854    A    1 Mar   16 Apr   25 May     4 June  15 June   3 Dec
1855    G   21 Feb    8 Apr   17 May    27 May    7 June   2 Dec
1856   FE    6 Feb   23 Mar    1 May    11 May   22 May   30 Nov
1857    D   25 Feb   12 Apr   21 May    31 May   11 June  29 Nov
1858    C   17 Feb    4 Apr   13 May    23 May    3 June  28 Nov
1859    B    9 Mar   24 Apr    2 June   12 June  23 June  27 Nov
1860   AG   22 Feb    8 Apr   17 May    27 May    7 June   2 Dec
1861    F   13 Feb   31 Mar    9 May    19 May   30 May    1 Dec
1862    E    5 Mar   20 Apr   29 May     8 June  19 June  30 Nov
1863    D   18 Feb    5 Apr   14 May    24 May    4 June  29 Nov
1864   CB   10 Feb   27 Mar    5 May    15 May   26 May   27 Nov
1865    A    1 Mar   16 Apr   25 May     4 June  15 June   3 Dec
1866    G   14 Feb    1 Apr   10 May    20 May   31 May    2 Dec
1867    F    6 Mar   21 Apr   30 May     9 June  20 June   1 Dec
1868   ED   26 Feb   12 Apr   21 May    31 May   11 June  29 Nov
1869    C   10 Feb   28 Mar    6 May    16 May   27 May   28 Nov
1870    B    2 Mar   17 Apr   26 May     5 June  16 June  27 Nov
1871    A   22 Feb    9 Apr   18 May    28 May    8 June   3 Dec
1872   GF   13 Feb   31 Mar    9 May    19 May   30 May    1 Dec
1873    E   26 Feb   13 Apr   22 May     1 June  12 June  30 Nov
1874    D   18 Feb    5 Apr   14 May    24 May    4 June  29 Nov

    [Transcriber's note: The following table is from
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominical_letter.

    A: common year starting on Sunday (or ending on Sunday)
    B: common year starting on Saturday (or ending on Saturday)
    C: common year starting on Friday (or ending on Friday)
    D: common year starting on Thursday (or ending on Thursday)
    E: common year starting on Wednesday (or ending on Wednesday)
    F: common year starting on Tuesday (or ending on Tuesday)
    G: common year starting on Monday (or ending on Monday)
    AG: leap year starting on Sunday (or ending on Monday)
    BA: leap year starting on Saturday (or ending on Sunday)
    CB: leap year starting on Friday (or ending on Saturday)
    DC: leap year starting on Thursday (or ending on Friday)
    ED: leap year starting on Wednesday (or ending on Thursday)
    FE: leap year starting on Tuesday (or ending on Wednesday)
    GF: leap year starting on Monday (or ending on Tuesday)]

{11}

                  Feasts And Fasts

                 Throughout The Year.



   Holy-days On Which There Is A Strict Obligation To
   Hear Mass, And Refrain From Servile-works.

All Sundays in the Year.
Ascension of our Lord.
Corpus Christi.
January 1--The Circumcision of our Lord.
January 6--The Epiphany.
March 17--The Feast of St Patrick.
March 25--The Annunciation of the B.V.M.
June 29--St. Peter and St. Paul.
August 15--Assumption of the B.V.M.
November 1--Feast of All Saints.
December 25--Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ.

    [The obligation is taken away on all other days, by decrees
    of Popes Pius VI. and VIII.]


               Fasting Days On One Meal.

All the Days in Lent, except Sundays.

The Eve of Whitsuntide.

The Quarter-tenses, or Ember-days, being the Wednesdays, Fridays,
and Saturdays, next after the first Sunday of Lent; after
Whit-Sunday; after September 14th: and after December 13th.

The Eves of  St. Peter and St. Paul; of the Assumption
of the Blessed Virgin Mary;  of All Saints; and of Christmas-day.

The Fridays and Saturdays in Advent.


         Days Of Abstinence From Flesh Meat.

All the Sundays in Lent, except when the use of meat is allowed
by the Archbishop or Bishop of the diocese.

All the Fridays throughout the Year.

N. B.--Eggs are forbidden on Fridays, when a fast falls on them;
and if a Fasting Day fall on a Sunday, the fast is kept on the
Saturday before. If Christmas-day fall on a Friday, neither fast
nor abstinence is observed.

{12}

N.B.--The Catholic Church commands all her children to be present
at the great Eucharistic Sacrifice, which we call the Mass, and
to rest from servile work, on Sundays and Holy-days.

Secondly--To abstain from flesh on all the days of fasting and
abstinence, and on fasting days to eat but one meal.

Thirdly--To confess their sins at least once a year.

Fourthly--To receive the blessed sacrament at least once a year,
and that at Easter, viz., between _Palm_ and _Low
Sundays_.

The time appointed in the Archdioceses of Dublin, for complying
with the Easter Duty, begins an Ash-Wednesday, and terminates on
Ascension Day. They who, without some reasonable cause, neglect
this important duty, are liable to be excommunicated whilst
living, and when they die, to be deprived of Christian burial,
according to the fourth Council of Lateran, can. 21.

Marriage cannot be contracted by persons within the fourth degree
of kindred without a dispensation, and if attempted is invalid.
Spiritual kindred, contracted by baptism or confirmation, is an
impediment.

Clandestine marriage is that which is not performed by the pastor
of one of the party, with certificate, or by another priest, with
his license, and in the presence of two or three witnesses.

Clandestine marriages are unlawful, and forbidden by the church;
and are null or invalid in all the dioceses of Ireland, as the
Decree of the Council of Trent, which annuls clandestine
marriages, has duly been received in them all, 2nd December,
1827, and was in force thirty days after, or 1st January, 1828.

The solemnizing of marriage is forbidden from the first Sunday in
Advent till after Twelfth-day; and from the beginning of Lent
till Easter-Sunday. At all other times it may be solemnized.


                   Plenary Indulgences

Plenary Indulgences are granted to the faithful of this kingdom
by complying with the usual conditions:--

  On the feast of St. Patrick, or any day within the octave.

  Item, on the feast of SS. Peter and Paul, or any day within the
  octave.

  Item, at the hour of death, to such as devoutly invoke the
  sacred name of Jesus, at least with the heart.

{13}

The other Indulgences which are granted to the faithful of the
Archdioceses of Dublin, on the feasts of the Nativity of our
Lord, the Circumcision, the Epiphany, the Resurrection, the
Ascension, Pentecost, Corpus Christi, on the five principal
festivals of the Blessed Virgin, and the feast of All Saints, &c,
are commonly published from the altars.

_Note_.--By an Indulgence is meant a relaxation or remission
of the temporal punishment due to sins already forgiven, both as
to the guilt and eternal punishment. Some Indulgences are called
_plenary;_ because, when the full effect of them is gained,
they remit all the debt of temporal punishment: others are called
_partial_; for example, an Indulgence of forty or an hundred
days, or of three, seven, ten, fifteen, or more years; because
the penitent is only thereby released in part, or from such a
proportion of the debt of temporal punishment as was formerly
enjoined by the penitential canons, according to the enormity of
the crimes committed, and as would have been remitted by God, had
the penitent undergone, for such a space of time, the severe
canonical penances which were in use in the Church until the
twelfth century.

The direct and immediate effect, therefore, of an Indulgence is,
to remit the debt of temporal punishment, and not to pardon or
remit sin, as it supposes sin already forgiven. But the sinner's
repentance being seldom so perfect as to release him entirely
from the whole punishment he deserves, on account of the injury
he has committed against the Divine Majesty, there usually
remains some debt of temporal punishment to be discharged, either
in this world or in the next. For though the mercy of God is
moved by a true repentance, to pardon the guilt and eternal
punishment due in hell for mortal sin; yet his justice often
substitutes in its place, and reserves some debt of temporal
punishment, to which the repenting sinner is liable on account of
his past sins; as appears evidently from several remarkable
instances recorded in holy writ, particularly Adam, King David,
Manasses, the Israelites, &c.

{14}

It is to discharge and cancel this debt of temporal punishment,
that works of penance are enjoined in the sacred tribunal of
Confession; and that the Catholic Church, like a compassionate
and indulging mother, opens her spiritual treasures from time to
time, to supply the wants and make up the deficiency of her
children. In virtue of the power given to her by Jesus Christ,
and in imitation of St. Paul, (2 Cor. x.) and several other
renowned doctors and pastors who flourished in the purest ages of
Christianity, she grants indulgences to such of the faithful as
are properly disposed, and apply with fervour to those works of
piety and religion, charity and penance, that are required on
their part, as conditions necessary to gain the benefit of an
indulgence.

      -----------------------------------------

       The Manner Of Lay Persons Baptizing An
            Infant In Danger Of Death.

Take common water, pour it on the head or face of the child, and
while you are pouring it, say the following words: "I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen."

-------------------------------------

                 The Roman Calendar
            For The Kingdom Of Ireland:

                    Containing

    The Feasts and Fasts of the said Kingdom, the Irish Saints,
    and Patrons of each Diocese; all on their proper days.


                    Explanations.

  The Festivals of the Holy-Days are in small capital Letters.

The Irish Saints are marked in _Italic Letters_.

The Founders of Religious Orders are marked thus, †

_Note_.--Ap. signifies Apostle, M. Martyr, B. Bishop, Ab.
Abbot, C. Confessor, V. Virgin, D. Diocese.

{15}

                      Calendar.



                January, 31 Days.


1 Circumcision of our Lord.

2 Octave of S. Stephen.
  In the Diocese of Limerick, S. _Munchin_. B. and C.

3 Octave of S. John, Apostle and Evangelist.

4 Octave of Holy Innocents.

6 S. Telesphorns, Pope and Martyr. Vigil.

6 Epiphany of our Lord, with an Octave.

7 S. _Kenligerna_, Widow.,
  S. Lucian, Martyr.

8 S. _Albert_. B. of Cashel.
  S. Appollinaris, B. C.

9 S. _Finan_, B. of Lindisfarne.
  S. Peter of Sebaste, B. C.

10 S. William, B. and C.

11 S. Hyginus, Pope and Martyr.
   S. Theodosius the Cenobiarch, Ab.

12 S. Arcadius, Martyr.

13 Octave of the Epiphany.

14 S. Hilary, B.C.
   S. Felix, Priest and Martyr.

15 S. Paul, the first Hermit,
   S. Maurus, Martyr.

16 S. _Fursey_, Ab.
   S. Marcellus. Pope and Mart.

17 S. Anthony, Ab.

18 Chair of S. Peter at Rome.
   S. Prisca, V.M.

19 S. Canute, King and M.
   SS. Maurius, Martha, Audifacis, and Abackum. Martyrs.

20 SS. Fabian and Sabastian, Martyrs.

21 S. Agnes, Virg. & Mar.

22 SS. Vincent and Anastatius, Martyrs.

23 Desponsation, Blessed Virgin Mary
   S. Emerentiana, V. and Martyr.

24 S. Timothy, Bp. and M.

25 Conversion of S. Paul the Apostle.

26 S. Polycarp, Bp. and M.

27 S. John Chrysostom, Bp. and Confessor.

28 Commemoration of S. Agnes.

29 S. Francis de Sales, Bp. and Confessor.

30 S. Martina. V. and M.
   S. _Amnichad_, Conf.

31 †S. Peter Nolasco, Conf.
   S. _Aidan_, Bp. of Ferns.

Feast of the most holy Name of Jesus, 2nd Sunday after Epiphany.

{16}

                February, 28 Days.

1 S. _Bridget_. Virgin. Patroness of Ireland.
  S. Ignatius, Bp. and Mar.

2 Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

3 S. Blase, Bp. and Mart.

4 S. Andrew Corsini, Bp. and Confessor.

5 S. Agatha, Virgin and Martyr.

6 S. Dorothy, V. and M.
  In the Diocese of Ardagh, S. _Mel_, B. and C.

7 S. Romuald, Abbot.
  S. _Malon_, Bishop.

8 S. John of Matha, Conf.

9 S. Apollonia, V. and M.
  S. _Cairecha_, Virgin.

10 S. Scholastica, Virgin and Martyr.

11 S. Raymund of Pennafort, Conf.
   S. _Elchin_, Bishop of Cluninfoda.

12 S. _Sedulius_, Bishop of Dublin.
   S. Benedict of Anian, Abbot.

13 S. _Modomnoc_, B.
   S. Catherine of Ricci, V.

14 S. Valentine, Priest and Martyr.

15 SS. Faustinas and Jovita. Martyrs.

16 S. _Tanco_, Bishop and M.
   S. Onesimus, Martyr.

17 S. _Fintan_, Abbot.

18 S. Simeon, Bp. and M.

19 S. Barbas, Bp. and Conf.

20 SS. Tyrannio, &c. Ms.

21 S. Severianus, Bishop and Martyr.

22 The Chair of S. Peter at Antioch.

23 S. Serenus, a Gardener, Martyr.

24 S. Matthias, Apostle.

25 S. Terasius, Patriarch of Constantinople. Conf.

26 S. Alexander, Patron of Alexandria.

27 S. Leander, Bp. and Con.

28 SS. Martyrs of Alexandria.

  In Leap-years February hath 29 days, and the Feast of St.
  Matthias is kept on the 25th.


                  March, 31 Days.

1 S. _Monenius_, Bishop of Cluainferta Brendam.
  S. David, B. C.

2 SS. Martyrs under the Lombards.

3 S. Cunegundis, Empress.

4 S. Cassimirus, Confes.
  S. Lucius, Pope and M.

5 S. _Kiaran_, Bp. and C.
  SS. Adrian, &c. MM.

6 S. _Fridolin_, Abbot. S. Chrodegang, B. and C.

7 S. Thomas of Aquino, Confessor and Doctor.
  SS. Perpetua and Felicitas, MM.

8 S. _Cataldus_, B. C.
  S. _Sennan_, B.
  S. John of God, Confessor.

9 S. Frances, Widow.

10 SS. Forty Martyrs of Sebaste.
   S. Firsullus, Bishop.

11 S. _Ængus_, Abbot.

{17}

12 S. Gregory the Great, Pope, Conf. and Doctor.

13 S. Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, C.

14 S. Maud, Empress.

15 SS. Abraham and Mary.

16 S. Julian, Martyr.

17 Patrick, Bishop and Confessor and Patron of Ireland.

18 S. _Fridian_, Bishop and Confessor.

19 S. Joseph, Conf. Spouse of the B. V, M.

20 S. _Cuthbert_, Bp. and C.

21 S. Benedict, Ab. Patron of the Western Monks.

22 S. Basil of Ancyra, Priest and Martyr.

23 S. Alphonsus Turibius, Bishop and Confessor.

24 S. _Carlain_, Bishop of Armagh.
   S. Ireneus, Bishop and Confessor.

25 Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

26 S. Ludger, Bp. and C.

27 S. _Rupert_, Bp. and C.

28 SS. Priscus, MM.

29 SS. Jonas, &c. MM.

30 S. _Fergus_, Bp. of Drumleth-glass.
   S. John Clymacus, Abbot.

31 S. Benjamin, Martyr.

  The Feast of the Seven Dolors of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
  Friday after Passion Sunday.


                April, 30 Days.

1 S. Hugh, Bp. and Conf.

2 † S. Francis of Paula, C.

3 SS. Agape, &c. MM.

4 S. Isadore, Bp. and Con.
  S. _Tigernach_, Bishop.

5 S. Vincent Ferrer, Conf.

6 S. _Celestine_, Pope and Confes.
  S. Cathubius, Abbot.

7 S. _Celus_, B. of Armagh.

8 S. _Kensalud_, Abbot of Benchor.
  S. Dionisius, Bishop and Confessor.

9 S. Mary of Egypt.

10 S. Bademus, Abbot.

11 S. Leo the Great, Pope Confessor and Doctor

12 S. Sabas, Martyr.

13 S. Hermenegild, Mart.

14 SS. Tiburtius, Valerian, and Maximus, MM.

15 S. _Rundham_, Bishop.
   S. Peter Gonzales, C.

16 S. _Tegalius_, Bp.
   SS. Martyrs of Saragossa.

17 S. Anicetus, P. and M.
   S. _Leochadius_, Abbot.

18 S. _Laserian_, Bishop of Leighlin.
   S. Apollonius the Apologist, M.

19 S. Leo IX. Pope and C.

20 S. Agnes, Virg. and Ab.

21 S. Anselm, Bp. and C.
   S. _Berachus_, Abbot.

22 SS. Soteras and Cauis, Popes and Martyrs.

23 S. George, Martyr, S. _Ibar_, Bishop.

24 S. Fidelis of Simarengen, Martyr.

25 S. Mark, Evangelist.

26 SS. Cletus and Marcellinus. Popes and Mars.

27 S. _Asicus_, Bp. of Elphin.
   SS. Anthimus, Bishop, &c. MM.

{18}

28 S. Vitalis, Martyr.
   S. _Cronan_, Abbot.

29 S. Peter, M. S. _Ficano_, Confessor.

30 S. Catherine of Sienna, Virgin.

  Patronage of S. Joseph, 3rd Sunday after Easter.


                May, 31 Days.

1 SS. Philip and James, Apostles.
  S. _Ultan_, Ab.

2 Athanasius, Bp. and C.

3 The invention of the Holy Cross.
  In the Diocese of Kildare, S. _Conleath_, Bp. and C.

4 S. Monica, Widow.

5 S. Pius V. Pope and C.

6 S. John before the Latin Gate.

7 S. Stanislaus, Bp. and M.

8 Apparition of S. Michael Arch.
  S. _Indratht_, M.

9 S. Gregory Nazianzen, Bishop and Confessor.

10 S. _Comgall_, Ab. S. Antonius Bp. and Conf.
   SS. Gordian and Epimachus, MM.

11 S. Mammertus, Bishop and Confessor.

12 SS. Nereus and Achilleus, Martyrs.

13 S. John the Silent, Bp. and Confessor.

14 S. Boniface, Martyr.
   S. _Carthagh_, Bishop of Lismore.

15 S. _Dympna_, V. and M.
   S. _Gonebrard_, Martyr.

16 S. Ubaine, B. C. and
   S. John Nepomucen, M.
   In the Diocese of Ardfert and Clonfert, S. _Brendan_. Abbot.

17 S. _Maw_, C.
   S. Paschal Baylon, Confessor.

18 S. Venantius, Martyr.

19 † S. Peter Celestine, Pope and C.
   S. Prudentiana, V.

20 S. Bernardin of Sienna, C.

21 S. Ubaldus, Bp. and C.

22 S. Ivo. Confessor.

23 S. Julia, Virg. and M.

24 S. Vincent of Lerins, C.
   S. _Mac-Cartin_, Bishop of Clogher.

25 S. Greg. VII. P. and C.
   S. Urban, P. and M.

26 † S. Philip Neri, C.
   S. Eleutherius, P. and M.

27 S. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi, V.
   S. John, P. and M.

28 S. Germanus, B. and C.

29 S. Maximinus, B. and C.

30 S. Felix, Pope and M.
   S. _Maguil_, Confessor.

31 S. Petronilla, Virg.
   †S. Angela of Brescia, V.


                  June, 30 Days.

1 S. Justin, Martyr.

2 SS. Marcellinus and Peter, MM.

3 S. _Comegen_, Bishop of Glendaloch.
  S. Cecilius, Conf.

4 S. _Petrocus_, Confessor.
  SS. _Breaca_, &c. Virgs.
  S. Francis Caracciolo, Confessor.

{19}

5 S. Boniface, B. and M.

6 † S. Norbert, B. and C.
  S. _Coca_, Virgin.

7 S. _Colman_, Bishop of Dromore, Conf.

8 S. _Syra_, V.
  S. _Bronius_, Bishop, Cuil-ira.
  S. Medard, Bp. and C.

9 S. _Columba_, Ab.
  SS. Primus and Felican, Martyrs.

10 S. Margaret, Queen of Scotland, Widow.

11 S. Barnabas, Apostle.
   S. _Mectalus_, Bishop,

12 S. John of Sahagun, C. and SS. Basilides, Cyras, &c. MM.

13 S. Anthony of Padua, C.
   S. _Macnisius_, Ab.

14 S. Basil the Great, Bp. and Conf.

15 SS. Vitus, Crescentia, and Modestus, MM.

16 S. John Francis Regis, Confessor.

17 SS. Nicander, &c. MM.

18 SS. Marcus and Marcellinus, MM.

19 † S. Juliana Falconieri, Virgin.
   SS. Gervasius and Protasius, MM.

20 S. Silverius, Pope and M.
   S. _Gobain_, Virgin.

21 S. Aloysius Gonzaga, C.

22 S. Paulinus, Bp. and C.

23 S. Etheldreda, V. and M.
  Vigil.

24 Nativity of S. John Baptist, with an Oct.

25 † S. William, Ab.

26 SS. John and Paul, Martyrs.

27 S. Ladislas, King and C.

28 S. Leo II. Pope and C. Vigil. Fast.

29 SS. Peter and Paul, Apostles, with an Oct.

30 Commemoration of S. Paul, Ap.


                  July, 31 Days.

1 Octave of S. John Baptist.
  S. _Cumian_, Bp.

2 Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
  SS. Processus and Martinian, MM.

3 S. _Rumold_, Bp. and M.
  S. _Killen_, Ab.

4 S. _Finbar_, Ab.
  S. Ulric, B. and C.

5 S. _Modwena_, Virgin.
  S. Peter, B. and C.

6 Octave of SS. Peter and Paul, Apostles.

7 S. Paulinus, Conf.

8 S. _Kilian_, Bp. and M.
  S. Elizabeth, Queen of Portugal.

9 SS. Martyrs of Gorcum.

10 SS. Seven Brethren, and Rufina and Secunda, Martyrs.

11 S. Pius I. Pope and M.
   S. _Drostan_, Ab.

12 † S. John Gualbert, Ab.
   SS. Nabor and Felix, Martyrs.

13 S. Anacletus, Pope and Martyr.

14 S. Bonaventure, B. C. and D.
   S. _Idus_, Bp.

15 S. Henry II., Emperor of Germany, Conf.

16 Commemoration of Blessed Virgin Mary of Mt. Carmel.

{20}

17 S. Alexins, Confessor,
   S. _Turnin_, Conf.

18 † S. Camillus de Lellis, Conf.
   SS. Symphorosa, &c. Martyrs,

19 † S. Vincent of Paulo, C.

20 † S. Jerom Æmiliani, C.
   S. Margaret, V, M.

21 S. Praxedes, Virgin.
   S. _Arbogastus_, Bishop.

22 S. Mary Magdalen.
   S. _Dabius_, Conf.

23 S. Apollinaris, B. and M.
   S. Liborius, B. C.

24 S. Christina, V. and M.
   S. _Declan_, B. Vigil.

25 S. James, Apostle.
   S. Christopher, Martyr.

26 S. Anne, Mother of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

27 S. Pantaleon, Martyr.
   S. _Congal_, Ab.

28 SS. Nazarius, Celsus, and Victor, Martyrs.
   S. Innocent, Pope & C.

29 S. Martha, V.
   SS. Felix, Simplicius, &c, MM.

30 SS. Abdon and Sennen, Martyrs.

31 † S. Ignatius of Loyala, C.


                 August, 31 Days.

1 S. Peter's Chains.
  SS. Maccabees, MM.

2 S. Stephen, Pope and M.
  S. _Chrocan_.

3 Finding of S. Stephen's Relics.

4 † S. Dominick, Conf.
  S. _Launus_, Ab.

5 Dedication of the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Nives.

6 Transfiguration of our Lord.
  SS. Xystus, Pope, Felicissimus, &c. Martyrs.

7 † S. Cajetan, Confessor.
  S. Donatus, Martyr.

8 SS. Cariacus, Largus, and Smaragdus, MM.

9 S. Romanus, Martyr.
  S. _Nathy_, Bp. and C.
  S. _Fidlimid_, Bp. and C.
  Vigil.

10 S. Laurence, M. with an Octave.
   S. _Blan_, Bp.

11 SS. Tiberius and Susanna, Martyrs.

12 † S. Clare, Virgin.
   S. _Muredach_ Bp. and C.

13 SS. Hypolitus and Cassianus, Martyrs.

14 S. Eusebius, Conf.
   S. _Fachanan_, Ab.
   Vigil. Fast.

15 Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary with an Oct.

16 S. Hyacinth, Conf.

17 Octave of S. Laurence.

18 S. Agapetus, Mart.
   S. _Degha_, Bp.
   S. Helen, Empress.

19 SS. Timothy, &c. MM.

20 S. Bernard, Abbot.

21 S. Jane Frances de Chantal, Widow.

22 Octave of the Assumption

23 S. Philip Beniti, Conf.
   S. _Eugenius_, B.
   Vigil.

24 S. Bartholomew, Apost.

25 S. Lewis IX. King of France, Confessor.

{21}

26 S. Zephyrinus, Pope and Martyr.

27 † S. Joseph Calasanctius, Confessor.

28 † S. Augustine, B. C. and D. S. Hermes. M.

29 Decollation of S. John Baptist.
   S. Sabina, M.

30 S. _Fiaker_, Conf.
   S. Rose of Lima, Virgin.

31 S. Raymund Nonnatus, Conf.
   S. _Aidan_, Bp.

   S. Joachim, on Sunday within the Octave of the Assumption.


                September, 30 Days.

1 S. Giles, Abbot.
  SS. Twelve Brothers, MM.

2 S. Stephen, King of Hungary, Confessor

3 S. _Macnisius_, B. & C.
  S. Simeon Stilites.

4 S. _Ultan_, Bishop.
  SS. Marcellus, &c. MM.

5 S. Laurence Justinian, B.C.
  S. _Alto_, Abbot.

6 S. _Bega_, V.
  S. _Macculindus_, B.
  S. Pambo, Abbot.

7 S. _Grimonia_, V. M.
  S. _Ennau_, B.
  S. Cloud, C.

8 Nativity Blessed Virgin Mary. with an Oct.
  S. Adrian, M.

9 S. Gorgonius, Martyr.
  S. _Kiaran_, Abbot.

10 S. Nicholas of Tolentine, Conf.
  S. _Finian_, B.

11 SS. Proteus and Hyacinthus, Martyrs.

12 S. _Albeus_, B.
   S. Eanswide, V. Abbess.
   S. _Sigonius_, Abbot.

13 S. Eulogius, B. & C.

14 Exaltation of the Holy Cross.
   S. _Cormac_, B.K.

15 Octave of Nat. Blessed Virgin Mary.
   S. Nicodemus, M.

16 SS. Cornelius & Cyprian, Bishops and Martyrs.
   SS. Euphemia, Lucia, and Geminiani, MM.

17 Impression of the Sacred Stigmas of S. Francis.

18 S. Joseph of Cupertino, Confessor.

19 SS. Januarius, Bishop, and Companions, MM.

20 SS. Eustachius and Companions, MM.
   Vigil.

21 S. Matthew, Apostle and Evangelist.

22 S. Thomas of Villanova, B. and C.
   S. Maurice and Companions, MM.

23 S. Linus, P. and M.
   S. Thecla, V. and M.
   S. _Eunan_, B. C.

24 Feast of the Blessed Virgin Mary of the Redemp. of Captives.

25 S. _Finbar_, Bp. of Cork.
   S. Cleofrid, Abbot.

26 SS. Cyprian & Justina, Martyrs.

27 SS. Cosmas & Damian, Martyrs.

28 S. Wenceslaus, Duke and Martyr.

29 Dedication of S. Michael, Archangel

30 S. Jerom, Priest, Conf. and Doctor.

  Festival of holy Name of Blessed Virgin Mary, Sunday within
  Octave of Nativity Blessed Virgin Mary.--Seven Dolors, 3rd
  Sunday in September.

{22}

                 October, 31 Days.

1 S. Remigius, B. and C.
  S. _Odran_, Conf.

2 Feast of the Guardian Angels.

3 S. Dionysius the Areopagite. Bp. and M.

4 † S. Francis of Assisium, Confessor.

5 SS. Placidus and Companions, Martyrs.

6 † S. Bruno, Confessor.

7 S. Mark, Pope & Conf.
  SS. Sergius, &c. MM.

8 S. Bridget, Widow.
  S. _Corcra_, Abbot.

9 SS. Dionysius, Rusticus, &c. Martyrs.

10 S. Francis Borgia, Conf.

11 S. _Kenny_, Abbot, patron of Kilkenny.

12 S. _Mobius_, Ab. of Glasnaidh.
   S. Wilfrid, B.C.

13 S. Edward, King & Conf.
   S. _Colman_, M.

14 S. Callistus, Pope & M.

15 † S. Teresa, Virgin.

16 S. _Gaul_, Abbot.
   S. _Syra_, Abbess.

17 S. Hedwiges, or Avoice, Duchess of Poland, W.

18 S. Luke, Evangelist.

19 S. Peter of Alcantara, C.

20 S. John Cantins, Conf.
   S. _Aidan_, Bishop.

21 S. Hilarion, Abbot.
  †SS. Ursula & Companions, Virgins and Martyrs.

22 S. _Donatus_ Bp. & Conf.

23 S. Theodoret, Martyr.

24 S. Raphael, Archangel.

25 SS. Chrysanthus and Daria, MM.

26 S. Evaristus, Pope & M.

27 S. _Abban_, Ab.
   S. _Oteran_, Bp. & Conf.
   Vigil.

28 SS. Simon & Jude, Ap.

29 S. _Colman_, Bp. & Conf.

30 S. Marcellus, Martyr.

31 S. _Folian_, M.
   S. Quintin, M.
   Vigil. Fast.

  Feast of the Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary, 1st Sunday in
  October. Anniversary of the Dedication of the Churches of
  Ireland, 2d Sunday in October.


                 November, 30 Days.

1 Festival of All Saints, with an Oct.

2 Commemoration of All Souls.
  S. _Erc_, Bp. of Slane.

3 S. _Malachy_, Bishop of Armagh, Conf.

4 S. Charles Borromeo, B.&C.
  SS. Vitalis and Agricola, MM.

5 S. Bertile, Abbess.

6 S. Leonard, Confessor.

7 S. Willibrord, Conf.

8 Oct. of All Saints.
  Four Crowned Brothers, M M.

9 Dedication of our Saviour's Church, called
  S. John of Lateran.
  S. Theodoras, M.

10 S. Andrew Avellina, C.
   SS. Triphon, &c. MM.

11 S. Martin of Tours, B. and C.
   S. Mennas, M.

12 S. Martin, Pope & M.
   S. _Livin_ B. & M.

13 S. Didacus, C.
   S. _Chillen_, Priest.
   S. Stanislas Kostka, C.

14 S. _Laurence_, B. & C.

{23}

15 S. Gertrude, Virgin.

16 S. Edmond, B. & C.

17 S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, B.C.
   S. _Duloch_, C.

18 Dedication of the Churches of SS. Peter & Paul.

19 S. Elizabeth, Widow,
   S. Pontain, Pope & M.

20 † S. Felix of Valois, C.

21 Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

22 S. Cecily, V. and M.

23 S. Clement, Pope & M.
   S. Felicitas, ML.

24 S. _Columban_, Abbot.
   S. John of the Cross, C.
   S. Chrysogonus, M.
   S. _Colman_, B. C.

25 S. Catharine, V. & M.

26 S. Peter of Alexandria, Bishop and Martyr.

27 S. _Virgil_, B. & C.
  S. _Secundin_, Bishop

28 S. Stephen the Younger,  Martyr.

29 S. Saturninus, Bishop & Martyr.
   Vigil.

30 S. Andrew, Ap.
   S. _Brendan_, of Birr, Abbot.

  Feast of the Protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary, 2d Sunday in Nov.


                 December, 31 Days.

1 S. Eligius, Bp. & Conf.

2 S. Bibiana, V. & M.

3 Francis Xavier, Conf. Apostle of the Indies.

4 S. Peter Chrysologus, Bp. & Conf.
  S. Barbara, Virgin & Martyr.

5 S. Sabbas, Abbot

6 S. Nicholas, Bp. & Conf.

7 S. Ambrose, Bishop, Confessor, and Doctor.

8 Conception of the B.V.M. with an Octave.

9 S. Leocadia, V. & M.

10 S. Melchiades, P. & M.

11 S. Damascus, P. & C.

12 S. _Finian_, Bishop.
   SS. Epimachus, &c. MM.

13 S. Lucy, Virg. & M.

14 SS. _Fingar_, and Companions, MM.
   S. Spiridion, Bp. & Conf.

15 Octave of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

16 S. Eusebius, B. & Mart.
   S. _Beanus_, Bishop.

17 S. Olympias, Widow.

18 Expectation of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
   In the Diocese of Killaloe, S. _Flannan_, B. & C.

19 S. Samthana, Vir. & Ab.
   S. Nimesion, Mart.

20 S. Philagonius, Bishop and Confessor.
   Vigil.

21 S. Thomas, Apostle.

22 S. Ischyrion, Martyr.

23 S. Serbulus, Confessor.

24 Vigil of the Nativity.
   Fast.

25 Nativity of our Lord.

26 S. Stephen, first Martyr.
   S. _Jarlath_, Bishop of Tuam, Confessor.

27 S. John, Apost. & Evan.

28 Feast of the Holy Innocents, with an Oct.

29 S. Thomas, Bishop of Canterbury, Martyr.

30 The Office of the Sunday within Octave of the Nativity.

31 S. Sylvester, Pope & C.

{24}

{25}

                 Morning Prayer.


  Morning Prayer is a duty which God requires as the first fruits
  of the day:--most religiously then should it be consecrated to
  him. The success of our actions for the rest of the day,
  depends in a great measure upon this first duty. To begin the
  day without imploring God's grace, and thanking him sincerely
  for the repose of the night, is certainly to expose ourselves
  to infinite danger.

  But before prayer, recollect yourself a moment; think what you
  are, of yourself and what God is, to whom you are going to
  speak. You will thus conceive the importance of the action, and
  the sentiments of humility, of regret for your faults, of
  attention, respect, and modesty, of fervour, love, and
  confidence, with which you should address him.

             Awaking in the Morning, say:

O my God, my only good, the author of my being, and my last end,
I offer thee my heart. Praise, honour, and glory be to thee, for
ever and ever. Amen.


                  At Up-rising, say:

+ In the name of the Father,
+ and of the Son,
+ and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

I will arise from this bed of sleep, to adore my God, and to
labour for the salvation of my soul. O! may I arise on the last
day to life everlasting!


               While clothing yourself, say:

O my God, clothe my soul with the nuptial robe of charity, and
grant that I may carry it pure and undefiled before thy
judgment-seat.

{26}

        When clothed, kneel down, and say:

+ In the name of the Father, &c. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore.
Amen.

Come, O Holy Ghost, take possession of my heart, and enkindle
therein the fire of thy divine love. Amen.

  Attend seriously to the presence of God; return him thanks for
  his benefits; and offer yourself to him without reserve.

O eternal God! most holy and adorable Trinity! Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; the beginning and end of all things; in whom we live,
move, and have our being; I firmly believe that thou art here
present; I adore thee with the most profound humility; I praise
thee; I give thee thanks from the bottom of my heart, for having
created me after thine own image and likeness, and redeemed me
with the precious blood of thy Son; for having hitherto preserved
me, and brought me safe to the beginning of this day. Behold, O
Lord, I offer thee my whole being, and in particular all my
thoughts, words, and actions, together with such crosses and
contradictions as I may meet with in the course of this day. I
consecrate them entirely to the glory of thy name, in union with
those of Jesus Christ my Saviour, that, through his infinite
merits, they may find acceptance in thy sight. Give them, O Lord,
thy blessing. May thy divine love animate them; and may they all
tend to the greater honour of thy Sovereign Majesty. Amen.

{27}

           Resolve to avoid evil, and to do good.

Adorable Jesus! divine model of that perfection to which all
Christians should aspire; I will endeavour this day, after thy
example, to be mild, humble, chaste, zealous, patient,
charitable, and resigned. Incline my heart, O Lord, to keep thy
commandments. I am resolved to watch over myself with the
greatest diligence and circumspection, and to live soberly,
justly, and piously for the time to come. I will place a guard on
my mouth, and a gate of prudence before my lips, that I may not
offend with my tongue. I will turn away my eyes, that they may
not see vanity; and I will be particularly attentive not to
relapse into my accustomed failings; but will struggle against
them, and with thy gracious assistance, correct them. Enlighten
my mind, O Lord; purify my heart, and guide my steps, that I may
pass this and the remaining days of my life in thy divine
service. Amen.


           Implore the necessary Graces.

Thou knowest, O God, my weakness; thou knowest that I am so poor
and destitute, that I cannot do, or even think of any good,
without thy assistance; arise, therefore, to my help, and
strengthen me with thy grace, that I may fervently execute what I
have firmly resolved, and not only avoid all the evil thou
forbiddest; but also perform all the good thou commandest.

{28}

              The Lord's Prayer.

Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom
come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation;
but deliver us from evil. Amen.


          The Angelical Salutation.

Hail Mary, full of grace, our Lord is with thee; blessed art thou
amongst women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. Holy
Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now and at the hour of
our death. Amen.


             The Apostles' Creed.

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, creator of heaven and
earth; and in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord; who was
conceived by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary; suffered
under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, died, and buried; he
descended into hell; the third day he arose again from the dead;
he ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty; from thence he will come to judge the living and
the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost; the Holy Catholic Church;
the communion of saints; the forgiveness of sins; the
resurrection of the body; and life everlasting. Amen.

{29}

               The Confiteor.

I confess to Almighty God, to blessed Mary ever a Virgin, to
blessed Michael the archangel, to blessed John the baptist, to
the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and to all the saints, that I
have sinned exceedingly in thought, word, and deed, _through my
fault, through my fault, through my grievous fault_. Therefore
I beseech the blessed Mary ever a Virgin, the blessed Michael the
archangel, the blessed John the baptist, the holy apostles Peter
and Paul, and all the saints, to pray to the Lord our God for me.

May almighty God have mercy on me, forgive me my sins, and bring
me to everlasting life. Amen.

May the almighty and merciful Lord grant me pardon, absolution,
and remission of all my sins. Amen.


            Invoke the blessed Virgin,
            your Angel guardian,
            and your Patron Saint.

O holy Virgin! Mother of God! my advocate and patroness! pray for
thy poor servant; prove thyself a mother to me. And thou, O
blessed Spirit! my Guardian Angel, whom God in his mercy hath
appointed to watch over me, intercede for me this day, that I may
not stray from the paths of virtue. Our glorious apostle St.
Patrick, and thou also, O happy saint, whose name I bear, pray
for me, that I may serve God faithfully in this life, as thou
hast done, and with thee glorify him eternally in heaven. Amen.

{30}

                   Indulgences

  To Be Obtained By The Faithful, Who Devoutly
  Repeat Acts Of Faith, Hope, And Charity.

  A Plenary Indulgence once a month, is obtained by those who
  repeat Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, devoutly, once every
  day; and who, on any day of that month, shall confess and
  receive the holy Communion, and pray for peace and concord
  among Christian princes, for the extirpation of heresy, and the
  exaltation of the Catholic Church; granted by Pope Benedict XIII.
  the 25th of January, 1728, and confirmed by Pope Benedict XIV.
  the 28th of January, 1756; who further granted the application
  thereof for the relief of the souls in purgatory; and also an
  Indulgence of seven years' and seven forty days' penance, to
  all the faithful, as often as they devoutly repeat the same.
  Pope Clement XIV. the 5th of April, 1772, made this Indulgence
  perpetual to the Catholics of this kingdom; but requires an Act
  of Contrition to be made previous to the Acts of Faith. Hope, and
  Charity. This Indulgence may be applied also for the relief of
  the souls in purgatory.


                     Acts Of

             Faith, Hope, And Charity,


            A Prayer Before The Acts.

O almighty and eternal God! grant unto us an increase of Faith,
Hope, and Charity; and that we may obtain what thou hast
promised, make us love and practise what thou commandest; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


               An Act Of Contrition.

O my God! I am heartily sorry for having offended thee; and I
detest my sins most sincerely, because they are displeasing to
thee, my God, whom I should have never ceased to adore and love.
I now firmly purpose, by the assistance of thy holy grace, never
more to offend thee; and to avoid for the future, to the utmost
of my power, all dangerous occasions which might expose me to
sin.

{31}

                 An Act Of Faith.

O my God! I firmly believe that thou art one only God, the
Creator and Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, infinitely great,
infinitely good, and infinitely perfect. I firmly believe that in
thee, one only God, there are three Divine Persons, really
distinct, and in all things equal, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. I firmly believe that God the Son, the second person
of the most Holy Trinity, became man; that he was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, and was born of the Virgin Mary; that he suffered
and died on a cross to redeem and save us: that he arose on the
third day from the dead; that he ascended into heaven, and
sitteth at the right hand of the Father, _always living to make
intercession for us;_ that he will come at the end of the
world to judge mankind, and render to every one according to his
works; that he will reward the good with eternal happiness and
condemn the wicked to the everlasting pains of hell. I believe
these and all other articles which the Holy Roman Catholic Church
proposes to our belief, because thou, my God, the infallible
Truth, hast revealed them; and thou hast commanded us _to hear
the Church_, which is _the Pillar and the Ground of
Truth_. In this Faith I am firmly resolved, through thy holy
grace, to live and die.

{32}

                 An Act Of Hope.

O my God! who hast graciously promised every blessing, even
heaven itself, through Jesus Christ, to those who keep thy
commandments: relying on thy power which is infinite, thy
mercies, which are over all thy works, and thy promises, to which
thou art always faithful, I confidently hope to obtain the pardon
of my past sins, which I now detest; grace to serve thee
faithfully in this life, by doing the good works thou hast
commanded; and eternal happiness in the next, through my Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.


                An Act Of Charity.

O my God! my Creator! my Redeemer! my Sovereign Good! whose
boundless charity to me has been unceasing, and whose infinite
perfections adoring angels behold with unspeakable delight, I
love thee with my whole heart and soul, and above all things; and
for thy sake I love my neighbour as myself. Oh, teach me, my
gracious God, to love thee daily more and more; and mercifully
grant that having loved thee on earth, I may love and enjoy thee
for ever in heaven.

{33}

                  A Pious Devotion,

  For a perpetual glorification of the MOST HOLY TRINITY, and the
  INCARNATION of our Blessed Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, first
  instituted in France, with the approbation of Christopher
  Beaumont, late Archbishop of Paris, and confirmed by a decree
  of his Holiness Pious VI. issued the 16th May, 1784; who, in
  order to promote and extend the same, was pleased to grant an
  Indulgence for the City of Rome, and the Faithful throughout
  the world, who shall voluntarily associate themselves in the
  practice of this devotion according to the intention of his
  Holiness, in the following manner.

  Three persons, united in our Lord by the bands of mutual
  charity, are to engage themselves voluntarily (though without
  any obligation of conscience) to practise a religious exercise,
  which consists in adoring the three divine Persons three times
  a-day, _viz._ morning, noon, and night, reciting seven
  _Gloria Patris_, &c. and one _Ave_, &c. each time, to
  adore the Incarnation of the Eternal Word, and in honour of the
  most holy Virgin Mother of God. These prayers may be said
  either in common or separately, according to the convenience or
  inclinations of the persons associated; and in order that these
  unions may be continued, it is necessary that the associates
  should be _mutually acquainted_, that in case of a vacancy
  by death or otherwise, the loss may be repaired by
  _appointing another;_ by which means this pious society
  may be perpetuated to the end of time.


         Litany Of The Holy Name Of Jesus.

  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ _hear us_.
  Christ _graciously hear us_.

  God the Father of heaven,
    _Have mercy on us._
  God the Son,  Redeemer of the World,
    _Have mercy on us._
  God the Holy Ghost,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Holy Trinity one God,
    _Have mercy on us._

{34}

  Jesus, Son of the living God,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Splendour of the Father,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Brightness of Eternal Light,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, King of Glory,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Sun of Justice,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Son of the Virgin Mary,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, most amiable,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, most adorable,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, the mighty God,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Father of the World to come,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Angel of the Great Council,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, most powerful,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, most patient,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, most obedient,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, meek and humble of heart,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Lover of Chastity,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Lover of Peace,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Lover of us,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Author of Life,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Example of Virtues,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, zealous Lover of Souls,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, our God,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, our Refuge,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Father of the Poor,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Treasure of the Faithful,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, good Shepherd,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, true Light,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, eternal Wisdom,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, infinite Goodness,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, the Way, the Truth, and the Life,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Joy of Angels,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, King of Patriarchs,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, the Inspirer of the Prophets,
    _Have mercy on us._

{35}

  Jesus, Master of the Apostles,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Teacher of the Evangelists,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Strength of Martyrs,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Light of Confessors,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Spouse of Virgins,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Crown of all Saints,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Be merciful unto us,
    _Spare us, O Lord Jesus!_
  Be merciful unto us,
    _Hear us, O Lord Jesus!_
  From all sin,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From thy wrath,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From the snares of the devil,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From the spirit of uncleanness,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From everlasting death,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From the neglect of thy holy inspirations,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' the mystery of thy holy incarnation,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy nativity,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy divine infancy,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy sacred life,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy labours,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy cross and passion,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy pains and torments,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy death and burial,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy glorious resurrection,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy triumphant ascension,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy joys and glory,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  In the day of judgment,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
    _Spare us, O Lord Jesus!_

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
    _Hear us, O Lord Jesus!_

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
    _Have mercy on us, O Lord Jesus!_

  Jesus, Master of the Apostles,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Teacher of the Evangelists,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Strength of Martyrs,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Light of Confessors,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Spouse of Virgins,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Jesus, Crown of all Saints,
    _Have mercy on us._
  Be merciful unto us,
    _Spare us, O Lord Jesus!_
  Be merciful unto us,
    _Hear us, O Lord Jesus!_
  From all sin,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From thy wrath,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From the snares of the devil,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From the spirit of uncleanness,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From everlasting death,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  From the neglect of thy holy inspirations,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' the mystery of thy holy incarnation,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy nativity,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy divine infancy,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy sacred life,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy labours,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy cross and passion,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy pains and torments,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy death and burial,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy glorious resurrection,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy triumphant ascension,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  Thro' thy joys and glory,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._
  In the day of judgment,
    _Lord Jesus deliver us._

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
    _Spare us, O Lord Jesus!_

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
    _Hear us, O Lord Jesus!_

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
    _Have mercy on us, O Lord Jesus!_

{36}

  Lord Jesus, _hear us!_
  Lord Jesus, _graciously hear us!_

O Lord Jesus Christ, who hast said, _Ask, and ye shall receive;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you;_ mercifully attend to our supplications, and grant us the
gift of divine charity, that we may ever love thee with our whole
hearts, and never cease from praising thy holy name; who liveth
and reigneth one God, world without end. Amen.


                The Salve Regina.

  Hail to the Queen who reigns above,
  Mother of clemency and love;
  Hail thou, our hope, life, sweetness; we,
  Eve's banish'd children, cry to thee.

  We, from this wretched vale of tears,
  Send sighs and groans unto thy ears;
  O then, sweet Advocate! bestow
  A pitying look on us below.

  After this exile let us see
  Our blessed Jesus, born of thee.
  O merciful, O pious Maid,
  O gracious Mary, lend thy aid.

V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God;

R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.


                    Let Us Pray.

O Almighty and eternal God! who didst prepare the body and soul
of the glorious Mary, Mother and Virgin, that by the co-operation
of the Holy Ghost she might become a worthy dwelling for thy Son;
grant, that as we rejoice in her commemoration, so by her pious
intercession we may be delivered both from present evils and
everlasting death: through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

{37}

                 The Angelus Domini.

  To be said morning, noon, and night, in memory of the adorable
  mystery of the Incarnation of our blessed Saviour.

1. The Angel of the Lord declared unto Mary: and she conceived of
the Holy Ghost. Hail, Mary, &c.

2. Behold the handmaid of the Lord: May it be done unto me
according to thy word. Hail, Mary, &c.

3. And the word was made Flesh: And dwelt among us. Hail, Mary, &c.


                   Let Us Pray.

Pour forth, we beseech thee, O Lord, thy grace into our hearts,
that we, to whom the incarnation of Christ thy Son was made known
by the message of an angel, may, by his passion and cross, be
brought to the glory of his resurrection: through the same Christ
our Lord.
Amen.


  Should the duties of your state of life afford you leisure, you
  may, after Morning Prayers, recite the prayer peculiar to the
  day, which may be found amongst the "Devotions for every Day in
  the Week:" meditate also on the proper Reflections of the day,
  which may be seen amongst the "Pious Reflections for every Day
  in the Month."

{38}

       Aspirations And Ejaculations

Which may be secretly repeated in the heart, amidst the ordinary
actions of the day.

O my God, grant me the grace never to offend thee.

O my God, teach me to love thee with my whole heart, and soul,
and mind, and strength, in time and eternity.

Too late have I known thee, O infinite goodness.

Too late have I loved thee, O eternal beauty.

To thee, O God! to thee alone be all honour, and glory, and
praise, and adoration, for ever.

Mortify in me, O Jesus, whatever displeaseth thee; and make me
according to thine own heart.

O blessed Jesus; give me grace to learn of thee to be meek and
humble of heart, that I may be united with thee, and find rest
for my soul.

O my God, and my All! teach me in all things to do thy holy will.

O Lord! keep me from sin, and grant me the grace of a happy
death.

O Fountain of all Goodness! have mercy on me.

O my God, grant me the grace to perform all my works with the
pure intention of pleasing thee.

Let the name of the Lord be blessed and glorified for ever and
ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

{39}

From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the
name of the Lord is worthy of praise.

I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall ever be in
my mouth.

Bless the Lord, O my soul; and let all that is within me bless
his holy name.

Thanks be to God for all his benefits.

Praise be to thee, O Christ; blessed be thy holy name, O Jesus.

O God of my heart, and my portion for ever; O let nothing in life
or death ever separate me from thee.

O rather let me die a thousand deaths than offend thee mortally.

  "In all thy works aim at perfection."--Ecclesiastes xxxiii. 23.


                  Prayers For Night.

  If it be a duty of the greatest importance to begin the day
  well, it is, doubtless, one of no less consequence to conclude
  it properly. The new graces conferred on us daring the course
  of the day, and the protection we stand in need of against the
  dangers of the night, are urgent reasons why we should address
  ourselves to God, and pray to him with the utmost gratitude and
  fervour.

  A daily Examination of Conscience, both in general, with regard
  to our whole conduct throughout the day, and in particular, with
  regard to our predominant vice, passion, or evil custom, and
  the particular virtue we want to acquire, is strongly
  recommended by all spiritual writers, as one of the most
  important duties of a Christian life, and the most profitable
  exercise we can apply ourselves to, both for the avoiding of
  sin, and the acquiring of virtue. It is a _looking-glass_,
  in which we see ourselves in our true colours, and come to the
  knowledge of our sins and evil inclinations. It is a
  _sponge_, by which we wipe away guilt from our souls, and
  become the more pure before God, the more diligently we
  practise it. If we do not daily weed the garden of our souls by
  this holy exercise, the corrupt ground of the heart will
  naturally produce vices and imperfections in abundance.

{40}

  The nightly Examination of Conscience makes up the principal
  part of the last exercise of the day. The method thereof
  consists in the following acts, viz., of the presence of God,
  thanksgiving, supplication, examine, sorrow, and good
  resolutions.

  The many single blessings which God has bestowed and does
  bestow on those families where prayers are regularly said in
  common, should alone be a sufficient inducement to establish
  this practice every where, and chiefly at night, when all may
  be assembled with greater convenience.--"_Where two or three
  persons shall be assembled in my name, there,_" saith Christ,
  "_shall I be in the midst of them._" O Christians, what
  stronger inducement can we have to procure so great a
  happiness?


  + In the name of the Father, &c. Amen.

  Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity,
  now and for evermore. Amen.

  Come, O Holy Ghost, replenish the hearts of the faithful, and
  enkindle in them the fire of thy divine love. Amen.


  Let us place ourselves in the presence of God,
  and humbly adore him.

Impressed with the most lively sense of the presence of thy
Eternal Majesty, I adore thee, O my God! I believe in thee,
because thou art truth itself; I hope in thee, because thou art
faithful to thy word; I love thee with my whole heart, because
thou art infinitely amiable and worthy of my love; and, for thy
sake, I love my neighbour as myself.

{41}

  Let us return thanks to God for the favours he has conferred on
  us.


Enable me, O Lord, to return thee sufficient thanks for all thy
inestimable blessings and favours.

Thou hast thought of me, and loved me, from all eternity; thou
hast formed me from nothing; thou hast delivered up thy beloved
Son to the ignominious death of the cross for my redemption; thou
didst preserve me from falling into the abyss of eternal misery,
when my sins had often provoked thee to cut the slender thread of
my life, which thou heldest in thy all-powerful and chastising
hand; and thou still continuest to preserve me, notwithstanding I
still continue to offend thee. Alas! my God, what return can I
make for the innumerable blessings thou hast conferred on me,
during the whole course of my life, as well as for the particular
favours of this day? O all ye angels and saints! unite with me in
praising the God of Mercies, who is so bountiful to so unworthy a
creature.


  Let us beg of God to make our sins known to us.


O Eternal Source of Light! who saidst, "_Let there be
light_," and there was light; illuminate the darkness of my
understanding, and dispel those shades of ignorance and error,
which conceal from me the filth and enormity of my offences.
{42}
Discover to me, I beseech thee, all the sins I have committed
this day, whether in thought, word, deed, or omission; grant me a
lively sense of their enormity, in order that I may hold them in
the utmost detestation, and dread nothing so much as ever to
commit them hereafter.


  Let us examine our consciences, and consider where and in what
  company we have been this day. Let us also call to mind the
  sins we have committed against God, our neighbour, and
  ourselves, and reflect whether we have fulfilled the duties of
  our state of life.


Against God: By omission or negligence in the discharge of our
religious duties; irreverence in the church; wilful distractions
or inattention at prayer; resistance to the divine grace; oaths;
murmurings; want of confidence and resignation. _Pause and
examine._

Against our Neighbour: By rash judgments; hatred; jealousy;
contempt; desire of revenge; quarrelling; passion; imprecations;
injuries; detraction; raillery; false reports; damaging, either
in goods or reputation; bad example; scandal; want of obedience,
respect, charity, or fidelity. _Pause and examine._

Against Ourselves: By vanity; human respect; lies; thoughts,
desires, discourses, or actions contrary to purity; by
intemperance, rage, or impatience; by an useless and sensual
life; or by sloth, in not complying with the duties of our state.
_Pause and examine._

{43}

  Repeat the General Confession, "I confess," &c. p. 29.


                     Prayer.

Penetrated with grief, and overwhelmed with confusion, at the
sight of my iniquities, I acknowledge myself unworthy, O Lord, to
be numbered amongst thy servants, much less to be accounted thy
child. Is it possible I could repay such infinite patience and
goodness with so much malice and ingratitude? Creator of heaven
and earth! I have sinned against thee! I have, alas! offended
thee, who are so good, so amiable, and so worthy of my love! Yet,
Lord, when I consider that I am the work of thy hands, and the
price of the blood of thine only Son, who expired on the cross
for my salvation, I cease to despair of thy pardon. It is
therefore through his infinite merits, that I implore and hope
that thou wilt grant me the forgiveness of my sins. Have pity on
me, O eternal Father, and spare me, for the sake of thy beloved
Son. Turn away thy face from my sins, and blot out my iniquities.
I am heartily sorry for them, because they are offensive to thee;
and shall continue to repent sincerely of them to the very hour
of my death. Amen.


      Let us make a firm purpose of amendment.


O Almighty and eternal God, I wish from the bottom of my heart,
that I had never sinned against thee; but since I have been so
unhappy, O grant me now thy grace, that I may never offend thee
more. Thou hast said: "I will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he be converted and live."
{44}
Convert me therefore, and I shall be converted. "Have mercy on me
according to thy great mercy; and according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies, blot out my iniquities." I renounce all sin,
firmly purposing henceforth to walk in the path of thy
commandments. This fixed resolution I am determined to keep, with
the assistance of thy grace, purchased for me through the
infinite merits of thine only Son, Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.


  Repeat the Lord's Prayer, the Angelical Salutation, the Creed,
  the Acts of the Theological Virtues, and the Angelus Domini, as
  in Morning Prayer.


          The Litany Of The Blessed Virgin.

                      Anthem

We fly to thy patronage, O holy Mother of God! despise not our
prayers in our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, O
thou ever glorious and blessed Virgin.

  Lord have mercy on us.
  Christ have mercy on us.
  Lord have mercy on us.
  Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us.
  God the Father of Heaven, _Have mercy on us._
  God the Son, Redeemer of the world, _Have mercy on us._
  God the Holy Ghost, _Have mercy on us._
  Holy Trinity, one God, _Have mercy on us._

{45}

  Holy Mary,
    _Pray for us._
  Holy Mother of God,
    _Pray for us._
  Holy Virgin of Virgins,
    _Pray for us._
  Mother^of Christ,
    _Pray for us._
  Mother of Divine Grace,
    _Pray for us._
  Most pure Mother,
    _Pray for us._
  Most chaste Mother,
    _Pray for us._
  Mother undefiled,
    _Pray for us._
  Mother unviolated,
    _Pray for us._
  Most amiable Mother,
    _Pray for us._
  Most admirable Mother,
    _Pray for us._
  Mother of our Creator,
    _Pray for us._
  Mother of our Redeemer,
    _Pray for us._
  Most prudent Virgin,
    _Pray for us._
  Most venerable Virgin,
    _Pray for us._
  Most renowned Virgin,
    _Pray for us._
  Most powerful Virgin,
    _Pray for us._
  Most merciful Virgin,
    _Pray for us._
  Most faithful Virgin,
    _Pray for us._
  Mirror of Justice,
    _Pray for us._
  Seat of Wisdom,
    _Pray for us._
  Cause of our Joy,
    _Pray for us._
  Spiritual Vessel,
    _Pray for us._
  Honourable Vessel,
    _Pray for us._
  Vessel of singular Devotion,
    _Pray for us._
  Mystical Rose,
    _Pray for us._
  Tower of David,
    _Pray for us._
  Tower of Ivory
    _Pray for us._
  House of Gold,
    _Pray for us._
  Ark of the Covenant,
    _Pray for us._
  Gate of Heaven,
    _Pray for us._
  Morning Star,
    _Pray for us._
  Health of the Weak,
    _Pray for us._
  Refuge of Sinners,
    _Pray for us._
  Comforter of the Afflicted,
    _Pray for us._
{46}
  Help of Christians,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Angels,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Patriarchs,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Prophets,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Apostles,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Martyrs,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Confessors,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of Virgins,
    _Pray for us._
  Queen of All Saints,
    _Pray for us._

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
  _Spare us, O Lord._

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
  _Graciously hear us, O Lord,_

  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
  _Have mercy on us._

  Christ hear us.
  Christ graciously hear us.
  Lord have mercy on us.
  Christ have mercy on us.
  Lord have mercy on us.
    Our Father, &c.
    V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God;
    R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.


                      Prayer.

Pour forth, we beseech thee, O Lord, thy grace into our hearts,
that we, to whom the incarnation of Christ thy Son was made known
by the message of an angel, may, by his passion and cross, be
brought to the glory of his resurrection; through the same Christ
our Lord. Amen.

{47}

                     Prayer.

Bless, O Lord, the repose I am going to take, that by renewing my
bodily strength, I may be the better enabled to serve thee. O all
ye saints and angels, but especially thou, O Mother of God,
intercede for me, not only during this night, and the rest of my
life, but more particularly at the hour of my death. Amen.


                   Another Prayer.

Pour down thy blessings, O Lord, on my parents, benefactors,
friends, and on my enemies too, if I have any. Protect my
superiors, spiritual and temporal. Help the poor and sick, and
those that are in their last agony. Convert all heretics and
unbelievers. O God of mercy and goodness! have mercy on the souls
of the faithful in purgatory; put an end to their sufferings; and
grant to all those for whom I am particularly bound to pray,
eternal light, rest, and happiness. Amen.


                      Hymn.

  Before the closing of the day,
  Creator, we thee humbly pray,
  That for thy wonted mercy's sake,
  Thou us into protection take.

  May nothing in our minds excite
  Vain dreams and phantoms of the night;
  Our enemy repress, that so
  Our bodies no uncleanness know.

{48}

  In this, most gracious Father, hear,
  Through Christ thy equal Son, our prayer;
  Who, with the Holy Ghost and Thee,
  Doth live and reign eternally. Amen.


                      Prayer.

Visit, we beseech thee, O Lord, this habitation, and drive away
from it all the snares of the enemy; let thy holy angels dwell
therein to preserve us in peace; and may thy blessing be upon us
for ever; through Christ our Lord. Amen.

May the divine assistance remain always with us. Amen.


  Before you go to bed, read a chapter in some spiritual book.
  Resolve within yourself on the subject of the next morning's
  meditation, which may be found amongst the "Pious Reflections
  for every Day in the Month," and think upon it while you are
  undressing. When you compose yourself in bed, think on your
  grave, and how soon death, of which sleep is an image, will be
  with you; and what your sentiments will then be of all worldly
  vanities. Offer up your sleep to God, submitting it with a pure
  intention to his holy will; that by this repose of nature you may
  recover new vigour of mind and body to serve him. Wish that every
  breath you are to draw this night, may be so many acts of praise
  and love of the divine Majesty, like the happy breathings of
  the angels and saints, who never sleep; and so compose yourself
  to rest in the arms of your Saviour.


  If you awake in the night, renew the offering of yourself to
  God, saying:

  "My soul hath desired thee in the night."
      Isaiah, xxvi. 9.

Into thy hands, O Lord, I recommend my spirit: Lord Jesus,
receive my soul, &c.


{49}

  A Prayer Before Sermon, Spiritual Reading, &c.

O incomprehensible Creator, true fountain of light, and only
author of all knowledge, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to enlighten
our understanding with the rays of thy wisdom, and to chase away
from our minds all darkness of sin and ignorance. Thou who makest
eloquent the tongues of those that want utterance, pour on our
lips, _and into our hearts_, the grace of thy blessing; give
us a diligent and obedient spirit, quickness of apprehension,
capacity of retaining, and the continual assistance of thy holy
grace: that we may apply whatever we hear, read, or meditate on,
to thy honour, and the eternal salvation of our own souls:
through, &c. Amen.

{50}

                   On The Mass.


  Of all the duties prescribed by our holy religion, the
  Sacrifice of the Mass is that which is most pleasing to God,
  and most salutary to man. Here it is that Jesus Christ renews
  the great mystery of our redemption; here doth he make himself
  our victim in a real, though unbloody sacrifice, and in person
  applieth to each of us the merits of that blood, which, hanging
  on a cross, he was pleased to shed for mankind. This should
  give us the most sublime idea of the Mass, and make us desire
  to hear it with the utmost reverence and devotion; for to
  assist at it irreverently, or without putting a proper
  restraint on our eyes and our whole exterior, is to dishonour
  religion, and renew, as far as in us lies, the insults he
  received on Mount Calvary. To avoid then so great an evil, let
  us always come to this august sacrifice with the most earnest
  devotion; let us enter into the spirit of Christ; let us offer
  ourselves up with him, and as he does; let the church, as we
  enter it, strike us with awe; let our modesty and recollection
  be uninterrupted from the beginning to the end thereof; let our
  hearts, thoughts, and imaginations be, as it were, buried in
  God, and the interests of our souls.

  The Practical Reflections (in small letter) at the head of each
  prayer, may help to excite our attention.

  The Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, usually read on Sundays
  and Holidays, before Mass, may be found in page 30.


O merciful Father, who didst so love the world as to give up thy
only Son to death, even the death of the cross, for our
redemption; vouchsafe, through his infinite merits, to accept in
our behalf the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass, in the offering
of which we are about to participate.
{51}
We approach thy throne, O Lord, with humble but firm hope, when
we remember that we have the price of the world's redemption to
lay before thee. That price has been paid by the death of thy
ever blessed Son; and among the wondrous means which he has
provided for applying the fruits thereof to our souls, we
contemplate, with especial gratitude, that enduring memorial of
his love, which he instituted at his last supper, whereby he
enables us not only to possess within us; in the divine
Communion, the very Author of grace, the Victim of propitiation,
who died for us on the cross, but also to present him anew to thy
acceptance, really present on our altar, as our Advocate and
Mediator, through the ministry of his Priests, in the adorable
Sacrifice of the Mass.

At this adorable Sacrifice we are now assembled to assist. O
Lord, look upon the face of thy Christ; and grant, that while we
unite with thy holy Church and its Minister, in offering him
before the throne of thy mercy, for all the purposes for which he
once shed his most precious blood, we may be made partakers of
the one all-atoning sacrifice which he consummated on Calvary.

{52}

Bowing down, therefore, in humble adoration, before thy sovereign
Majesty, we now offer the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass to thy
honour and glory, to acknowledge thy infinite perfections, thy
supreme dominion over all thy creatures, our entire subjection to
thee, and our total dependance on thy gracious providence.

We offer it to thee in thanksgiving for having created us to
thine own image, and destined us for eternal glory; for having
redeemed us from the slavery of Satan by the precious blood of
thy divine Son; for having called us to the true faith; assisted
us by thy graces; borne with our ingratitude; watched over us by
thy special providence; blessed us, notwithstanding our utter
unworthiness, with the continuance of thy gracious protection;
and for all the other innumerable favours which we owe to thy
undeserved bounty.

{53}

We offer it to move thee to compassion for our spiritual
miseries, that thou mayest grant us the gift of compunction and
the pardon of our sins.

We offer it for the propagation of the Catholic Faith, that all
may be brought into the _one fold_ under the _one
shepherd;_ for our most holy Father the Pope, that _the
spirit of wisdom, and fortitude, and piety,_ may rest upon
him; for our Prelate, and for all the Pastors and Clergy of thy
holy Church, that they may direct the faithful in the way of
salvation; for the Queen, _and for all who are in high station,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life;_ for concord and
good will among all states and people; for the necessities of
mankind; for the inhabitants of this parish, particularly for the
congregation here present; and to obtain all the blessings that
we stand in need of in this life, the happiness of heaven in the
next, and eternal rest to the faithful departed.

{54}

And as Jesus Christ so ordained, when he instituted at his last
supper this wonderful mystery of his power, wisdom, and goodness,
we offer the Mass in grateful remembrance of all that he has done
and suffered for the love of us, making special commemoration of
his bitter passion and death, and of his glorious resurrection
and ascension into heaven. Vouchsafe, O almighty and eternal God,
to whom alone the supreme worship of sacrifice is due, graciously
to accept it for these and all other purposes agreeable to thy
holy will. We offer it, not confiding in any merits of our own--
we offer it through the merits of the same Jesus Christ, thy
beloved Son, our High Priest and Victim, and in the name of the
most holy Trinity, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
to whom be honour, praise, and glory, for ever and ever.

O all ye Angels and Saints who stand before the throne of God,
vouchsafe to join in our humble supplications; and thou, above
all, O ever blessed Virgin, immaculate mother of God our Saviour,
assist us with thy prayers. We know that thou art near to that
most loving Son, through whom only we can find _access to the
throne of grace_, and who will refuse thee nothing, that
through his infinite merits thou wilt deign to solicit for us.
{55}
At thy suggestion he wrought the stupendous miracle of changing
water into wine. Oh then, beseech him, by all that he has
suffered for our salvation, that the still more wondrous prodigy
which he is about to perform on our altar, may not, through our
unworthiness, be unprofitable to us; that he may move us to
assist at it with the deepest awe, the firmest confidence, and
the most ardent love; that it may thus ascend in the odour of
sweetness to the throne of mercy in our behalf, to be to us an
unfailing source of grace here, and a pledge of eternal life
hereafter. Amen.

{56}

               Prayers At Mass. [Footnote 2]

    [Footnote 2: For an explanation of the Latin liturgy, and of
    the sacrifice and sacred ceremonies of the Mass, the reader
    is referred to the commencement of the Supplement, where also
    will be found the Ordinary of the Mass, (in English,) as read
    by the priest at the altar.]


              The Beginning Of The Mass.


+ In the name of the Father, and of the
  Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

It is in thy name, O adorable Trinity, it is to honour thee, and
to do thee homage, that I assist at this most holy and august
sacrifice. Permit me then, O Lord, to unite my intention with
that of thy Minister now at the altar, in offering up this
precious victim; and give me the same sentiments I ought to have
had on Mount Calvary, had I been an eye-witness of that bloody
sacrifice.


                   At The Confiteor.

  Think, in the bitterness of your heart, on all your past sins,
  and recollect, in a general manner, such of them as are most
  humiliating. Lay your weaknesses before God, and beg of him to
  pardon them. Implore his assistance in all your necessities,
  through the infinite efficacy of this great sacrifice.

{57}

I confess, O my God, not only in thy presence, who seest the
secrets of hearts, but also in the presence of all the blessed in
heaven, and faithful on earth, that I have often and grievously
offended thee in thought, word, and deed, _through my fault,
through my fault, through my most grievous fault._ Yes, Lord,
I have sinned; I acknowledge to my shame, and with the most
bitter regret, that I have ungratefully abused all thy gifts; and
therefore I humbly beseech thee, O blessed Virgin Mary, and all
ye saints and angels, to intercede for me. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to
listen to them; grant to the ardour of their prayers, what thou
mayest justly refuse to the coldness of mine; and to their
services, that pardon to which my offences can have no claim.


   When The Priest Is Going Up To The Altar.

Unite, O Lord, our hearts and wills, and remove from us every
thing that may any way make us unfit for appearing in thy
sanctuary. Of ourselves we are unworthy to appear in thy
presence: therefore we implore the intercession of the saints in
our behalf. Grant to their prayers the pardon of all our sins:
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

{58}

                At The Introit.

We beseech thee, O Lord, that we may be truly prepared for the
offering of this great sacrifice to thee this day. Our sins alone
can render us displeasing to thee, we therefore call aloud to
thee for mercy.


              At The Kyrie Eleison.

Have mercy on us, O Lord, and forgive us all our sins; and though
we have nothing of our own to move thy goodness, let our
importunity prevail: have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us.


           At The Gloria In Excelsis.

  Conceive a vehement desire of promoting the glory of God, and
  your neighbour's good. Rejoice with the angels, at the share
  you nave in these holy mysteries; and form to yourself the
  highest idea of the majesty of God; and of his Son Jesus
  Christ.


Who is like unto thee, O almighty God! To whom can the most
unlimited tribute of honour, praise, and glory be due, either in
heaven or on earth, if not to thee, the King of kings, the Lord
of lords, and beneficent Creator of the universe!
{59}
The angels and saints, with unceasing rapture, sing forth thy
praises, and glorify thy name in heaven; and shall not I, the
work of thy hands, praise thee also on earth? Yes, O Lord!
Graciously vouchsafe to accept the homage I now pay thee, and
which I purpose fervently to offer thee all the days of my life.


                  At The Collect.

  So called, because the priest lays before God the necessities
  of all his people; their vows and desires _collected_, as
  it were, together; whence, turning to the congregation, he
  invites them to unite with him in the petition, saying:
  _Oremus_, or _Let us Pray_.

Almighty and eternal God, we humbly beseech thee to look down
from thy heavenly sanctuary upon this congregation, and
graciously hear these prayers, which thy church addresses to thee
for us by the ministry of thy priest.

Grant us, in thy infinite mercy, pardon of our sins, health of
mind and body, peace in our days, unity and increase of Catholic
faith, fervent charity, sincere devotion, patience in suffering,
and every thing else conducive to thy glory and our own
salvation: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

{60}

                   At The Epistle.

  Return God thanks for having called you to the knowledge of his
  holy law; submit to it with perfect docility; and beg of him to
  extend our holy religion over the whole world.


O eternal God, who never ceasest to excite us to the worship and
love of thy holy name, or to arm us against the attacks of the
world, the flesh, and the devil, by the public ministry of thy
church, by the doctrine of thy prophets and apostles, and by many
other holy admonitions; grant we may faithfully attend to these
lessons of salvation, that thus our knowledge of thy law may
never rise in judgment against us, but guide us securely to thee:
through Christ our Lord. Amen.


                     At The Gospel.

  Look on the Gospel as the rule of your faith and morals; a rule
  which Christ himself has drawn up; a rule which you have solemnly
  promised by your baptism to follow, and by which you shall most
  certainly be judged.

{61}

It is not thy interpreters, O God, who are now to instruct me; it
is thy only Son; it is his word I am about to hear. I most
gratefully embrace this heavenly doctrine. I stand up to declare
in the face of heaven and earth, that I will walk faithfully in
that way which he hath marked out for me. He tells me here, that
"it will avail a man nothing to gain the whole world, if he lose
his own soul; that the sensual, the covetous, the worldling, the
libertine, the detractor, and such as are insensible to the
miseries of the poor, shall have no share in his heavenly
kingdom; and that, in order to become his disciple, I must take
up my cross and follow him." I receive with my whole heart all
these sacred maxims. Grant me the grace to put them in practice;
for to what purpose should I declare myself thy disciple, if I
were not to live according to the maxims of thy gospel.

{62}

                     At The Creed.

  Renew your faith in all those articles which the church
  proposes to your belief, because they are founded on God's own
  word, revealed in the scriptures, announced by the prophets,
  supported by miracles, confirmed by the blood of the martyrs,
  verified by the establishment of our faith, and obvious by the
  sanctity of our religion.


I return thee infinite thanks, O Lord, for having given me birth
in the bosom of the holy Catholic Church. The precious gift of
faith is much more dear to me than any advantage of birth or
fortune. Grant me a perfect docility for all it teaches, as well
for what I understand, as for what is above my conception. It is
neither just nor possible that I should fully comprehend an
infinite God, who cannot even comprehend myself. By thy grace I
am firmly convinced of the wisdom and sincerity of thy apostles,
by whom thou hast announced these mysteries to the world. By them
the world was converted; it submitted, and believed them; which,
if done without a miracle, must be in itself the greatest of all
miracles. What more then can I desire? What surer grounds can I
have?
{63}
On these principles I rest my belief. Here is the faith which to
my last breath I shall profess:--I firmly believe that thou art
one God in three distinct persons, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, who of nothing hast created all things. I believe, O
heavenly Father, that thy only Son, who is perfectly equal to
thee, holy, powerful, and eternal, as thou art, became man for
love of us; suffered, died on the cross, rose again, and ascended
into heaven; from whence he shall come at the last day to judge
the world; and that of his blessed kingdom there shall be no end.
I believe in the Holy Ghost, who is also true God as thou art,
proceeding from thee and thy Son: I believe that he spoke by the
prophets, and that by him we are sanctified, I confess one
baptism for the remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of
the body, and the life of the world to come, where I firmly hope
to possess thee, Lord, for ever and ever. Amen.

{64}

                 At The Offertory.

  Consider what an advantage it is to have in this sacrifice,
  wherewithal to honour God perfectly; to thank him in a manner
  equal to his gifts; to blot out entirely your past sins; and to
  obtain, both for yourself and others, all those graces you
  stand most in need of.

O holy Father, almighty and eternal God, how unworthy soever I
may appear in thy presence, yet I presume to offer thee this
Host, by the hands of the priest, with the same intention which
Christ my Saviour had, when he first instituted this august
sacrifice, and which he now has at this very instant that he
immolates himself for us. I offer it in acknowledgment of thy
supreme dominion over me and all creatures. I offer it in
expiation of my crimes; in thanksgiving for all thy benefits. I
offer it to obtain from thy infinite goodness, for my parents,
benefactors, friends, and enemies, all those precious gifts and
graces which only through him can be obtained, who is Just by
excellence, and who became a victim for the sins of men.
{65}
I earnestly entreat thee to bless and protect the holy Catholic
Church, our chief pastor the Pope, our Bishops and Clergy, the
Queen and Royal Family, and all our fellow-subjects of every
denomination. Remember also, O Lord, the souls of the faithful
departed, and grant them, through the merits of thy Son, eternal
light and peace. Have mercy upon all heretics, infidels and
sinners. Bless and preserve all mine enemies; and as I freely
forgive them the injuries they have done, or mean to do me, so do
thou, in thy mercy, forgive me mine offences. Amen.


              At The Preface.

  Raise up your thoughts to heaven, even to the very throne of
  the Divinity, and there with most holy and respectful awe, pay
  homage to his glorious majesty, mixing your own praises with
  those sacred hymns with which the heavenly spirits are ever
  praising him.


Do thou thyself, O Lord, raise up my heart; inflame it with thy
love, and free it from all earthly affections; let it rest in
heaven, where thou my treasure art, and on this altar also, where
thou art going to present thyself to thy eternal Father for our
sake. As my life, O Lord, is a continual succession of thy
favours, so let my thanksgivings be also uninterupted.
{66}
And since thou art going to renew the greatest of all sacrifices,
should not I also break forth into the most lively
acknowledgments? Permit me then, O Lord, to join my feeble voice
with the host of heavenly spirits, and to exclaim with them, in
transports of joy and admiration: "_Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Sabaoth: The heavens and the earth are filled with thy glory.
Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the
highest._"



                  At The Canon.

  Represent to yourself the altar as a throne of mercy, upon
  which Christ is to sit; where you are entitled to present
  yourself, to expose your wants, to ask for blessings, and
  obtain them. Can he who giveth us his only Son, refuse us any
  other favour whatsoever?


O Father of Mercy, graciously receive this most holy Sacrifice,
which we offer to thee by the hands of thy priest, in union with
that which thy beloved Son offered thee during his whole life, at
his last supper, and on the cross.
{67}
Look down on thy Christ, thy dearest and only begotten Son, "in
whom thou art always well pleased;" and by the infinite merits of
his incarnation, nativity, tears, labours, sufferings, and death,
have mercy upon me, and upon all those for whom I ought to pray
[_here name the particular persons_]; my parents, brethren,
friends, benefactors, relations, and those who have injured me,
or whom I may have injured. I also beseech thee to guard,
prosper, and extend the holy Catholic Church; to pour down thy
blessings upon our chief pastor the Pope, upon the Bishops and
all the Clergy; enlighten and guide them in the way of salvation.
Bless and preserve the Queen, and all the Royal Family. Look down
upon us all, I beseech thee, O Lord, with eyes of mercy and
compassion. Bring us all to the perfect practice of a holy and
virtuous life here, and to the possession of thy eternal glory
hereafter. May we all know thee; may we all please thee
perfectly; may we fear, love, and glorify thee: through the same
Jesus Christ, who, with thee and the Holy Ghost, liveth and
reigneth one God, world without end. Amen.

{68}

Why have not I, O God, at this moment, the ardent sighs with
which the holy patriarchs wished for the Messiah? Why have not I
their lively faith and their ardent love? Come, Lord Jesus! come,
sweet Redeemer of the world! come quickly to accomplish a
mystery, which is an abridgment of all thy other miracles.

Thou art, O Lord Jesus! the true pastor of souls, who didst lay
down thy life for thy flock! Thou art the Lamb of God, that died
upon the cross to save us! Prostrate in spirit before thee, I
desire to praise and bless thee, both now and for ever. Amen.


             At The Elevation Of The Host.

  Behold your God, your Saviour, and your Judge! Contemplate in
  silent astonishment what passes before you. Excite every
  fervent sentiment in your soul, which fear, respect, and
  confidence can inspire.

{69}

Hail, O Victim of Salvation! eternal King! incarnate Word!
sacrificed for me and all mankind! Hail, precious Body of the Son
of God! sacred Flesh, torn with nails, pierced with a lance, and
bleeding on a cross for us poor sinners! O amazing goodness! O
infinite love! O let that tender love plead now in my behalf: let
all my iniquities be here effaced, and my name be written in the
book of life. I believe in thee; I hope in thee; I love thee. To
thee be honour, praise, and glory, from all creatures, for ever
and ever. Amen.


          At The Elevation Of The Chalice.

Hail, sacred Blood, flowing from the wounds of Jesus Christ, and
washing away the sins of the world! O cleanse, sanctify, and
preserve my soul, that nothing in future may ever separate me
from thee. Behold, O eternal Father, thy holy Jesus, and look
upon the face of thy Christ, in whom thou art well pleased. Hear
the voice of his blood crying out to thee, not for vengeance, but
for mercy and pardon. Accept this divine oblation; and through
the infinite merits of all the sufferings that Jesus endured on
the cross for our salvation, be pleased to look upon us, and upon
all thy people, with an eye of mercy.

{70}

  During the remainder of the Canon contemplate in the most
  affectionate manner, your Saviour here present. Reflect on the
  mysteries he renews. Unite the sacrifice of your heart to that
  of his body. Offer him up to God his Father, with the several
  intentions of the four kinds of sacrifice offered in the Old
  Law, beseeching him to accept the prayers which his dear Son
  addresses to him in our behalf.

It is now, O eternal Father, that we truly and really offer to
thy Divine Majesty, that pure, holy, and immaculate victim which
thou thyself hast been pleased to grant us, and of which all
other offerings were only the types and figures. The sacrifices
of Abel, of Abraham, and of Melchisedech, were of no value, when
compared to ours. This glorious victim, thy dear Son himself, the
perfect object of thy eternal love, and alone worthy of thy
altar, is an offering by so much the more precious than theirs,
as God is greater than all creatures.

{71}

     As A Holocaust, Or Whole-burnt Offering.

O sovereign Creator and Lord of all things! graciously vouchsafe
to accept my humble homage, in union with that which thou here
receivest from Jesus Christ, the only worthy adorer of thy
infinite Majesty. Whilst, therefore, he immolates himself upon
this altar, I unite my intentions with those views and purposes
himself has, in offering to thee this his holy sacrifice. It is
he alone can form a just conception of the boundless excellence
and unspeakable majesty of The Great Creator of Heaven and earth;
he alone fully comprehends the entire extent of thy dominion. He
beholds (what we blind mortals cannot) how far all creatures,
visible and invisible, depend on thee. He plainly conceives that
thy dominion is absolute over all we are, all we possess or can
hope for in time or eternity. It is in acknowledgment of this thy
sovereign authority, and to make, in his name, a public
profession of our total dependence on thee, that I unite with him
in his daily renewal of this most holy sacrifice.

{72}

         As A Sacrifice Of Thanksgiving.

Vouchsafe, O most bountiful Lord God, to receive this precious
victim in thanksgiving for all thy benefits. Thou hast created me
to thine own image and likeness, and if thy all-powerful hand had
not continued to preserve the slender thread of my life, I must
ere now have fallen back into my original nothing. For my sake
thou didst abandon thy beloved Son to the cruelty of the Jews,
and to an ignominious death; nor doth a single moment of my
existence pass away without fresh proofs of thy bounty. O that I
could, in some degree, acknowledge those thy innumerable favours,
even at the price of my blood; but the offering I here make thee
is infinitely more acceptable; it is nothing less than thy
beloved Son, equal to thee in all things, the very figure of thy
substance, and splendour of thy glory.

{73}

          As A Sacrifice Of Expiation.

Remember, O Lord, that the sacrifice we now offer to thee, is
essentially the same, and equally propitiatory with that which
our Saviour offered thee on Mount Calvary, though different as to
the manner of offering. However base, therefore, our ingratitude
may be, or however manifold our transgressions, we cannot but
hope for pardon, since it is the blood of a God we offer in
atonement.


         As A Sacrifice Of Impetration.

O God of infinite bounty, be pleased now to crown all the favours
thou hast hitherto conferred on me, by the gifts of a _lively
faith_, a _firm hope_, and an _ardent charity_.
Bless all my labours and undertakings. Give me an intuitive
knowledge of thy holy will, and an unshaken resolution to put it
into execution. Grant me perseverance in thy grace to the end of
my life. Have mercy on the souls of the faithful departed,
particularly on those for whom I am in a more especial manner
bound to pray. [_Name them_.] Deliver them, O Lord, from all
their sufferings, and admit them into the mansions of everlasting
bliss: through the infinite merits of Christ Jesus, thy only Son,
who liveth, &c. Amen.

{74}

              At The Pater Noster.

  Let us imagine ourselves present with Jesus on a new Calvary.
  Let us remain at the foot of his cross, with the tender
  compassion of Magdalen, with the ardent love of St. John; or,
  standing afar off with St. Peter, let us weep bitterly over our
  manifold sins and offences.


What a happiness, O my God, to have thee for my Father! How
joyful to think, that heaven, where thou art, is also to be my
eternal dwelling-place! May thy name be glorified throughout the
whole world. Reign, O Lord, over all hearts, affections, and
desires. Refuse us not our spiritual and corporal food. We freely
forgive others; do thou also forgive us. Support us in the trials
and temptations of this life, and preserve us from sin, the
greatest of all evils.
Amen.

{75}

               At The Agnus Dei.

  God, so glorious in heaven! so powerful on earth! so dreadful
  in hell! is here only a lamb, full of sweetness and bounty!
  Behold! he comes here to take away the sins of the world, and
  thine in particular. O what a motive of confidence! O what a
  subject of consolation!


O Lamb of God, sacrificed for my sake, have mercy on me! O
adorable Victim of my salvation, look down on me and save me!
Divine Mediator! obtain pardon of thy eternal Father for me a
sinner, and mercifully grant me the sweets of thy peace. Amen.


                At The Communion.

  To communicate spiritually, renew, by an act of faith, your
  firm belief of Christ's _real presence_. Make an act of
  contrition. Desire most earnestly to receive him with the
  priest; beg of him to accept these desires, and to unite
  himself to you in the effusion of his graces.


O that I were among the number of those whose sanctity allows
them to communicate daily! What a happiness, O my God! could I at
this moment erect a throne for thee in my heart, pay thee my
homage, lay open to thee my wants, and participate in the favours
thou grantest to those who _really_ and _worthily_
receive thee.
{76}
But since I am unworthy, do thou, O Lord, supply my want of the
proper dispositions. Grant the pardon of my manifold sins, which
I detest from the bottom of my heart, because they displease
thee. Cast thy compassionate eye upon me, and purify my soul,
that the ardent wish I now conceive to be united to thee by a
worthy communion, may be speedily accomplished. But until the
arrival of so happy a moment, I earnestly entreat thee, O dearest
Lord, that thou wouldst make me partaker of all those advantages
which the communion of the priest may produce in those thy
people. By the efficacy of this enlivening sacrament, increase my
faith, strengthen my hope, revive in my soul the rays of divine
charity, inflame my heart with thy love, that it may pant only
for thee, and live for thee alone. Amen.

{77}

                At The Last Prayers.

  Strive earnestly to offer your Lord sacrifice for sacrifice, by
  becoming the victim of his love. Immolate freely to him all
  your sinful inclinations, and whatever is contrary to his holy
  will.


Since thou, O Lord, hast sacrificed thyself for my salvation,
shall not I desire to be sacrificed for thy glory? Yes, I am thy
victim: do with me as thou willest. I consecrate my whole being
to thee. I willingly accept whatever crosses thou art pleased to
send me. Receiving them from thy fatherly hand, I embrace them,
and unite them with those thou hast endured for my sake. Before I
quit thy temple, strengthen the resolution I have made to serve
thee with more fidelity, and to struggle, not only against my
ordinary failings, but chiefly against that to which I am most
inclined. Thy law shall henceforth be my rule of conduct during
the remainder of my life; and I will forfeit every worldly
consideration, and suffer every calamity, sooner than transgress
it. Amen.

{78}

              At The Benediction.

  Receive the blessing from the priest, as given in the name of
  the Lord. Thank him sincerely for the favours here granted you.
  Lay up with care the fruits of this sacrifice; and let your
  conduct be such, as that all who see you, may clearly perceive
  how much you have profited by so holy an action.

Most holy and adorable Trinity! as it is by thee we began this
sacrifice, so it is by thee we desire to conclude it. Suffer us
not therefore, O Lord, to depart hence without thy blessing. Give
it us by the ministry of this priest. May it ever remain with us;
may its influence always direct our actions; and may it be a sure
pledge of that final benediction which thine elect shall receive,
when called by thee to thy kingdom of eternal glory. Amen.


                At The Last Gospel.

Divine Word! only Son of the Father! Light of the World! who
camest from heaven to show us the way thither; I adore thy
Majesty with most profound respect; I place my whole confidence
in thee; I most firmly hope, that as thou art my God, a God made
man to save mankind, thou wilt grant me those graces which my
sanctification may require, and also the enjoyment of thee in
glory. Amen.

{79}

               A Prayer After Mass.

I return thee infinite thanks, O my God, for permitting me to
assist at this holy sacrifice, in preference to so many others
more worthy of so great a favour; and I hope, that through thy
great mercy, thou wilt pardon me the faults which I may have here
committed, either  by my tepidity or inattention. Though I now
return hence to my worldly employments, yet I will remember,
through the course of the day, what thou hast here done for me;
and shall endeavour that no thought, word, or action of mine,
deprive me of the advantages of which I have now been a partaker.
Amen.

{80}

           A Preparation For Confession.

  There is scarcely any duty of greater importance in religion,
  than to receive the Sacrament of Penance with the necessary
  dispositions. Penance is as indispensably requisite for those
  who have fallen into sin after baptism, as baptism itself is
  for such as have never been baptized. _It is a second plank
  after the shipwreck of sin, without which the sinner must
  inevitably perish_. But then it is to be observed, that this
  sacrament must be received with the necessary dispositions. The
  cleansing of the baptismal robe, and restoring it to its
  original purity, is not to be effected without much labour and
  application. It would be absurd to imagine, that the
  unchangeable justice of God, which could not be satisfied but
  by the sufferings of Jesus Christ, and which, notwithstanding
  these sufferings, doth still condemn to eternal torments the
  unrepenting sinner; it would be absurd, I say, to imagine that
  his justice should now be appeased by a superficial or outward
  compliance with this duty, accompanied perhaps with
  insincerity, gross negligence, or a fixed adherence to mortal
  sin, and therefore destitute of real sorrow, change of heart,
  and a firm purpose of amendment. The enormity of sin is the
  same at this day as it ever was; it is as unchangeable as God
  himself; because it is essentially a rebellion against him; a
  breach of his law, an insult offered to his eternal Majesty,
  and consequently not more remissable at present in the
  sacrament of penance, than at the earliest period of
  Christianity, when the severest discipline prevailed, and when
  the fervour of primitive penitents was so ardent.--Hence, that
  this merciful institution may never be frustrated of its end,
  and in order that the sinner may always receive the pardon of
  his offences, we must strictly fulfil these five following
  conditions:

  I. An examination of conscience, that we may know all our sins.

  II. A heart-felt sorrow for having committed them.

  III. A firm resolution never to commit them again.

  IV. A candid and humble confession of them to a priest
  empowered to absolve us.

  V. A desire or intention of satisfying God, and our neighbour
  also, if injured.

{81}

                 A Protestation

      Before The Examination Of Conscience.


O God, the searcher of all hearts, behold, I here protest, in thy
presence, that what I now design is sincerely for the honour of
thy name, and because I heartily desire to be delivered from the
guilt of my sins: therefore I come to thy sacrament of penance,
that, complying with thy holy institution, I may obtain thy
blessing and pardon, as thou has promised. May thy holy grace
assist me in performing this great duty well, as it is thy mercy
which has called me to it.

  Think seriously, and with the most lively gratitude, on all the
  benefits God hath so liberally bestowed on you, and particularly
  for his goodness in preparing this sacrament as a remedy for
  your sins.

How great are my obligations to thee, O my God, in thus providing
for me, after my disgrace, the means of a perfect reconciliation.
To have purified me in the waters of baptism, was not enough;
thou hast also left me the waters of penance, to wash me still
more from my iniquities, and cleanse me from my sins. For this
end thou hast left to the church, in the persons of the apostles,
the power of remitting our offences: "_Receive ye the Holy
Ghost; whose sins ye shall forgive, shall be forgiven."_ O
what Excessive goodness! What an advantage to poor sinners, to
have a tribunal established for them, always open, where they may
be received into favour!
{82}
Can I ever be insensible to so striking an instance of thy
bounty? I have withdrawn myself from thee by a formal contempt of
thy law, and thou art pleased to make the first advances to meet
me: O Father of mercies, and God of goodness, be thou for ever
blessed! Permit me to fly to this powerful refuge; and suffer not
that, by a new ingratitude, I should for the future ever abuse so
excellent a resource of salvation. No: it is not human respect,
nor custom, nor the fear of being thought careless of my soul,
that brings me at present to this sacrament of reconciliation;
no, it is a sincere regret for having incurred thy displeasure;
for who can be at rest, O my God, when he knows that he is thy
enemy, and that he has offended the very best of fathers?


                      Prayers


        Before The Examination Of Conscience.


  Beg of God to make your sins known to you, and to give you a
  true sense of their malice. Prostrate yourself in spirit at the
  feet of your Redeemer, as Magdalen did when she washed them
  with her tears; or imagine yourself on Mount Calvary, and
  there, beneath his cross, pour forth your prayers to him,
  resolving to acquit yourself of this confession, as if it were
  to be your last.


O holy Spirit, eternal Source of Light, mercifully vouchsafe to
enlighten the darkness of my understanding, that I may clearly
perceive the true state of my conscience.
{83}
Thou who hast created me, and art to be my judge, dost fully
behold the most secret recesses of my heart; show me now,
therefore, my sins, in as conspicuous a manner as I shall behold
them when on the point of appearing at thy tremendous tribunal.
My object at present is, to prevent the rigorous account I must
there give of all my thoughts, words, and actions; for were I now
deficient in that sincere exactness which is necessary in the
examination and confession of my sins, thou wouldst infallibly
correct, at thy unerring tribunal, the injustice and iniquity of
such a proceeding. Discover, then, to me, O my God, all these
secret thoughts, irregular desires, criminal words, and actions,
or omissions of my duty, by which I may have violated thy sacred
laws, or scandalized my neighbour. O do not permit self-love to
seduce and blind me, but rather remove the veil it places before
my eyes, that beholding the true state of my interior, I may make
an humble and sincere confession of my sins to thy minister.

I desire, like the prodigal child, to enter seriously into
myself, and without delay to forsake my evil ways, in which I
have been wearied out in the pursuit of empty toys and mere
shadows, seeking in vain to satisfy my thirst with muddy waters,
and my hunger with the husks of swine. I ardently desire to
return to thee, O Fountain of Life! but, O my God, though I can
go astray from thee fast enough, when left to myself, yet I
cannot make one step towards returning to thee, unless thy divine
grace stir me up and assist me.
{84}
This grace, then, I most humbly implore, prostrate in spirit
before the throne of thy mercy. I beg it for the sake of Jesus
Christ, my Redeemer, who died upon the cross for me and for all
sinners. Thou hast said, "_There is joy in heaven for one
sinner that doeth penance._" Give me now the grace of true
repentance, and let heaven rejoice at my conversion. Assist me in
this great work by thy heavenly light, in order that I may
discover all my imperfections, see all my sins in their true
colours, and sincerely detest and confess them. I know thou
desirest not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted and live. I know that thy mercies are above all thy
works, and I most confidently hope, that as in thy mercy thou
hast spared me so long, and hast now given me this desire of
returning to thee, so thou wilt finish the work that thou hast
begun, by assisting me in every part of my preparation for it,
and bringing me to a perfect reconciliation with thee.



  Examine yourself attentively, not only on the sins you have
  committed since your last confession, but also on the faults
  you may have committed in making it; but beware of scrupulosity
  or anxiety; for in this examination it is only necessary that
  you should use such a moral diligence as any temporal concern
  might require, where it is neither your intention nor your
  interest to be deceived. For this purpose, calmly recollect on
  the different occasions of sin which have since fallen in your
  way, or to which your state and condition of life exposes you;
  the places you have frequented, the persons you nave conversed
  with; &c. &c.; in the doing of which the following table of
  sins will greatly assist you.

{85}
                Sins Against God.

  In Matters of Faith.

    Have you been guilty of heresy, or disbelief of any article
    of faith, or of voluntarily doubting of any article of faith?

    Have you rashly exposed yourself to the danger of infidelity,
    by reading bad books, keeping wicked company, going into places
    of worship belonging to other communions during the time of
    their service, and joining with them in their worship?

    Have you, by word or deed, denied your faith, or railed at or
    despised holy things?

    Have you been ignorant of the articles of your faith and the
    duties of your religion, or have you been negligent in
    instructing, or procuring the necessary instructions for
    those under your care?

    Have you given credit to dreams, taken notice of omens, or
    made any other superstitious observations?

    Have you used charms or spells, or consulted fortune-tellers,
    or made use of any other superstitious practices to find out
    things to come, recover things lost, &c. How often? and with
    what scandal and ill example to others?


  Of Hope.

    Have you despaired of salvation, or of the forgiveness of
    your sins?

    Have you rashly presumed upon God's goodness, continuing to
    offend him because he is merciful; going on in your sins,
    without any thought of amendment, depending upon a death-bed
    repentance?

    Have you relied upon yourself rather than upon divine grace;
    or neglected for a long time to return to God by repentance,
    after falling into mortal sin?


  Of Charity.

    Have you loved any creature as much or more than God?

    Have you murmured against the providence of God, resisted his
    inspirations, refused to submit to his divine will, not
    prevented evil when you could and ought, committed sins
    through human respect?


  Of Religion.

    Have you made a sacrilegious confession or communion?

    Have you received the sacraments of confirmation or matrimony
    in the state of mortal sin?

    Have you abused the holy scripture, or profaned holy places
    or sacred things?

    Have you blasphemed God or his saints?

    Have you been negligent in the divine worship, seldom or
    never adoring and praising God, or giving him thanks for his
    benefits?

    Have you prayed but seldom, or with little attention, or
    omitted to make acts of faith, hope, and charity?

{86}

    Have you behaved with irreverence in the house of God, or
    broken any vow or solemn promise made to him?

    Have you neglected to hear mass on Sundays and holy-days of
    obligation? or have you heard it with wilful distractions, or
    not taken care that your children or servants should hear it?

    Have you neglected confession and communion at Easter, or
    omitted the penance enjoined you, or acquitted yourself of
    these religious duties carelessly?

    Have you sworn falsely, or what you did not certainly know
    whether it was true or false?

    Have you broken your lawful oaths, or sworn to do any thing
    that was wicked or unlawful?

    Have you had a custom of swearing rashly or inconsiderately,
    by the name of God, by your soul, or by the way of
    imprecation upon yourself or others?

    Have you sworn by the blood or wounds of God, or any other
    blasphemous oath, or been accessory to others swearing,
    cursing, or blaspheming?

    Have you spent the Sundays or holy-days of obligation in
    idleness or sin, or been the occasion of others so spending
    them?

    Have you done any servile work without necessity upon those
    days?

    Have you broken the days of abstinence, or eaten more than
    one meal on fasting days, or been accessory to others so
    doing? How often, &c.


    Sins Against Our Neighbour.

  In Thoughts.

    Have you been deficient in point of charity
    towards your neighbour?

    Have you judged rashly of him?

    Have you willfully entertained thoughts of hatred, aversion,
    rancour, or a coldness and resentment against him?

    Have you, on this account, endeavoured to avoid meeting or
    speaking to him?

    Have you envied him in his merit, reputation, fortune or
    employments?

    Have you conceived desires of revenge against him, and wished
    that harm might befall him?

    Have you been hard-hearted, or without any feeling or
    compassion for him in his affliction?

    Have you felt in yourself a secret pleasure and satisfaction
    when any disgrace happened to him, and discontent in seeing
    him thrive and flourish?

    [These sins may vary in their malice, according to the length
    of time we were thus affected, or the relation we stand in to
    the different persons in question, or according to the
    greater or less importance of the matter under our
    consideration.]

{87}

   In Words.

    Have you spoken harshly to your neighbour; given him abusive
    language; railed at him; miscalled him; mocked and ridiculed
    him; exposed him to scorn; affronted him; censured his
    conduct; found fault with every thing he did; put wrong
    constructions upon his actions; calumniated or detracted him;
    been pleased to hear others speak ill of him; listened to and
    encouraged the calumny or detraction when you could prevent
    such discourses? [N.B.--The motive for speaking thus, the
    number of persons present, and the subject of this
    uncharitable language, must be specified, as we are bound to
    repair the injury to the best of our power.]

    We also sin by ill-natured reports or insinuations, malicious
    expressions, whether true or false; by giving bad advice and
    bad example; by instilling bad or dangerous principles; by
    flattering others, or approving of evil; by giving false
    testimony; by discovering the secrets or the faults of
    others; by abusive words, reproaches, bad wishes or
    imprecations, &c.

  In Actions.

    Have you wronged, deceived, or circumvented your neighbour in
    buying or selling?

    Have you injured him by stealing, cheating, usury, extortion,
    or any unlawful contract?  by putting off false money, or using
    false weights or measures?

    Have you bought or received stolen goods?

    Have you contracted debts without design of paying them?

    We also sin by wronging our creditors, or our own family, by
    prodigal expenses; by refusing to pay our just debts when
    able, or by culpable extravagance rendering ourselves unable
    to pay them by neglecting the work or business for which we
    were hired, and obliged by contract to perform; in fine, by
    unjustly taking or keeping any thing of value belonging to
    another; in which case it is impossible to obtain forgiveness
    without making restitution to the best of our power. [And
    here it is to be observed, that where two or more jointly
    injure another, in goods or reputation, they are jointly and
    severally obliged to restitution; that is to say, they are
    bound to contribute their respective proportions towards
    repairing the injury; and every individual of them is
    answerable before God for the whole injury, when either or
    any of the accomplices refuse to repair their portion
    thereof.]

  In Omissions.

    Have you neglected to succour, comfort and assist your
    neighbour in necessity?

    Have you neglected to restore ill-gotten goods, or to repair
    injured characters?

    Have you refused to be reconciled to an enemy, or to perform
    duties of obligation, such as respect and love towards
    parents, obedience to superiors, &c.

{88}

    Sins Against Ourselves Are Committed

  By Pride.

    In having too great an esteem for ourselves, and haughtily
    despising others

    In being too apt to speak of our own affairs, or in our own
    praise;

    In aspiring to honours and preferment through vanity;

    In affecting to be humble, or in deceiving others by
    hypocrisy

    In being influenced in what we do by human respects, for
    obtaining the applause and esteem of men

    In being too much wedded to our own opinions and
    inclinations;

    In being too solicitous about our health;

    In being too fond of the pleasures, comforts, and
    conveniences of life.


  By Avarice.

    In being backward in giving alms according to our ability;

    In squandering away in gaming, or in vain and foolish
    expenses, the substance that Providence hath given for the
    relief of the poor and distressed;

    In not only refusing them an alms which we can afford, but in
    refusing it with bitterness, reproaches, imperious,
    ill-natured language, or with an insulting air;

    In being too much attached to the goods of this life; where
    it must be ever remembered, that whatever is _really_
    superfluous to us belongs of right to the poor; that where
    there is much, much should be given; and that where there is
    only a little, even some of that little should be cheerfully
    given; for "_God loves the cheerful giver._"


  By Envy.

    In being sorry for the prosperity of others

    Rejoicing at their misfortunes

    In wishing with jealousy for what belongs to them.


  By Impurity.

    In willfully dwelling upon, or taking pleasure in unchaste
    thoughts.

    [N. B.--The penitent must here mention whether these bad
    thoughts were entertained during a considerable time, and how
    long; whether they were accompanied with desires of committing
    the evil; whether they caused irregular motions; whether in a
    holy place; and, finally, whether the objects of these sinful
    desires were single or married, kindred or relations, or
    persons consecrated to God.]

{89}

  By Words.

    In speaking obscenely, or with a double meaning, which is as
    bad, if not worse; in listening with pleasure to such vile
    language. [N. B.--this sort of discourse is still more
    criminal, when it passes between two persons of a different
    sex. We also sin grievously this way, by singing unchaste
    songs, by giving toasts and sentiments contrary to modesty,
    or by permitting them to be given when we can prevent them,
    or by not retiring on such occasions.]


  By Looks.

    In viewing immodest objects;

    In reading bad books;

    In keeping indecent pictures;

    In frequenting plays and public assemblies, which are but too
    often the schools of vice, where dangerous objects are held
    up to view, and where vice is represented, not in its native
    horrible colours or consequences, but as mere gaiety.

    Comedies also are so full of indecent sentiments and
    indelicate allusions, as cannot but offend a modest ear, and
    have an immoral tendency. They are not only powerful
    incentives to this vice, but are besides evidently unlawful,
    for the following reason: viz. because we cannot assist at
    them without contributing, by our purse and our example, to
    maintain a set of people in a profession, or way of life,
    which was always deemed infamous by the Catholic Church.
    Under this head likewise may be classed, the tempting of
    others to sin, by dissolute glances, gestures, or immodesty
    in dress or behaviour.

  By Actions.

    In abusing and defiling the sanctity of marriage by such
    liberties and irregularities as are contrary to the order of
    nature;

    in touching ourselves or others immodestly;

    in permitting indecent liberties to be taken with us. [N.B.--
    It is necessary to explain every thing, in order to make
    known such circumstances as may increase or diminish the
    guilt, with as much modesty as possible; and also to declare,
    whether we have employed, or neglected to employ the
    necessary means of overcoming this vile passion. We should
    carefully distinguish what is wilful, from what is not; an
    effect of deliberation, from one of mere negligence; also the
    number of these bad actions, or at least the length of time
    we continued in the habit of committing them; with what sort
    of persons we have sinned, or desired to sin, but this
    without mentioning their names. And as it too often happens
    with young persons, who have miserably fallen into a certain
    sin of a lonely and abominable nature, either to conceal this
    crime, or not faithfully confess how often they have been
    guilty of it, we therefore earnestly beseech such to reflect
    seriously on the fatal evils in which they involve
    themselves. Let them consider, that all those confessions,
    and the communions which follow them, are only so many
    sacrileges, removing them still farther from God, and
    provoking his just indignation against them; that the longer
    they continue in this state of Hypocrisy, the more difficult
    it must be to overcome their bashfulness, and the more
    anguish they must feel in their own interior; that no
    practice is more destructive of health, beauty, or genius,
    than this; that it deforms and debilitates the wretched
    perpetrator; that it must, not only in a moral, but also in a
    physical sense, degrade him beneath the rank of the brute
    creation, and render him contemptible to mankind.]

{90}

  By Gluttony.

    In exceeding the bounds prescribed by temperance;

    in eating or drinking to excess;

    in exciting others to do so;

    in not observing with due exactness the days of fasting and
    abstinence enjoined by the church;

    in exceeding the quantity which is usually allowed at
    collation.


  By Anger.

    In abusing, quarrelling, striking, or wishing evil to
    others; in provoking others to quarrel or fight. Which sins
    are still more heinous when parents or superiors are the
    objects thereof.


  By Sloth.

    In neglecting our religious or moral duties;

    in performing them carelessly;

    in leading a life of idleness, voluptuousness, and
    dissipation;

    in passing our time unprofitably,
    when the duties of our state call on us to labour.

    We are also guilty by following the bent of our inclinations,
    and gratifying self-love;

    by studying too much our own ease;

    by too great a remissness in mortifying our passions or
    senses.


                   After The Examination.

  Having discovered the different sorts of sins of which you have
  been guilty, together with their number, enormity, or such
  aggravating circumstances as may considerably increase their
  malice or change their nature, your next endeavour should be to
  excite in your breast a _heart-felt sorrow_ for having
  committed them, and a sincere detestation of them. This being
  the most essential, as well as the most difficult, of all the
  dispositions requisite to a good confession, with what
  humility, fervour, and perseverance should you not importune
  Him who holds the hearts of men in his hands, to grant it you!

{91}

  In the mean time, seriously meditate on those powerful motives
  for exciting contrition, which the church holds forth to her
  children; and in order to feel their force the more
  effectually, endeavour to enliven your faith, to strengthen
  your hope, and inflame your charity, by devoutly reciting the
  acts of the three theological virtues (_page_ 30). In the
  next place reflect on those motives which are most capable of
  alarming, and at the same time of melting your heart into
  compunction; such as the everlasting torments of hell; the
  eternal loss of God, and of the joys of heaven, the horror and
  filthiness of sin; the goodness of God in all he has done, and
  all he still does, and all he will do for us, if we continue to
  love and serve him; particularly that astonishing instance of
  his love and undeserved mercy, in forbearing to cut your
  slender thread of life, and to precipitate you into eternal
  torments in the very height of your rebellion against him. This
  consideration alone must necessarily engage you to cry out with
  ecstatic surprise and astonishment, "_How good must God be in
  himself who has been so good to me, his faithless and
  ungrateful child!_" He saw nothing in you deserving of his
  mercy; he saw every thing in you that merited his wrath and
  indignation.

  This last reflection on the infinite goodness of God, if dwelt
  on with due attention, cannot fail to inflame your heart with
  an unfeigned love of Him for his own sake, _the purest and
  best of all motives_. Whilst the heart is thus softened by
  divine love into compunction for your sins, form an unshaken
  resolution of never more offending him, of doing your utmost to
  amend your life, of satisfying for your sins, and of repairing
  any injury you may have done your neighbour, either in his
  character or property.

  If, with these sentiments glowing in your breast, you cast
  yourself at the feet of your confessor and reveal to him all
  the sins you can recollect, _with tears_ of compunction,
  and in a truly penitential spirit, be assured you shall return
  _with joy_ from the tribunal of confession, and feel
  realized in yourself the consoling promise of the Holy Spirit,
  that "_They who sow in tears, shall reap in joy_." Psalm
  cxxv.


                At The Confession.

  Begin by devoutly making the sign of the cross,  + saying at
  the same time, _Bless me, O Father, for I have sinned_.
{92}
  Then repeat the _Confiteor_, or "I confess to the
  Almighty," &c. till you come to the words, "_through my
  fault,_" at which strike your breast, glowing with
  compunction, like the humble publican in the gospel; and so
  proceed to accuse yourself with candour and sincerity, telling
  first how long it is since you were last at confession, whether
  you were then absolved, (a circumstance of the utmost
  importance, which many are too negligent in attending to,) and
  whether you performed your penance. Having confessed all the
  sins you can remember, listen with docility to your confessor,
  whilst he endeavours to excite you to contrition, and
  prescribes the various means, either of atoning for the sins
  you have confessed, or of preventing future relapses.



            Prayers Before Confession.

  We are taught by the holy Council of Trent, that those who
  would obtain the grace of justification, should be thus
  disposed: they must have faith; they must fear the justice of
  God; they must hope for mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord;
  they must begin to love God; they must hate sin; they must
  sincerely resolve to change their lives, and keep the
  commandments. To infuse these necessary dispositions into the
  soul of the penitent, is the intent of the following prayers:


I am fully sensible, O my God, that there cannot be a greater
misfortune than to have displeased thee, who art infinitely good
and worthy of all our affections. I tremble when I consider how
terrible a misfortune it is to fall unprepared into thy hands;
for who can bear that dreadful sentence: _Depart from me, ye
accursed, into eternal fire!_--Matthew xxv. But the thought of
losing thee, O Lord, alarms me still more than any other
punishment whatsoever. Thy patience in waiting for me, thy
readiness to pardon me, the multitude of thy mercies, which I
have so often experienced, are now present to my mind; they
upbraid me most forcibly.
{93}
Thou hast brought me forth from nothing, created me to thine own
image and likeness, ransomed me with thy precious blood, and
after I had rebelled and become a slave to Satan, thou didst
still bear with me, adopt me as thy child, and prefer me to
thousands who were never enlightened by thy holy law. Yet I have
deserted thee, I have tired myself in the ways of iniquity, I
have hated thy discipline, I have turned my back on all thy
commandments. Though thou hast called me, yet have I refused to
return; though thou hast frequently stretched out thy hands to
me, yet I have paid no regard to thy invitations. Wretch that I
am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Who shall give
water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, that day
and night I may weep for my ingratitude? I have sinned! what
shall I do to appease thee? O Guardian of men! behold I
acknowledge my iniquity. My transgressions are become a heavy
burden upon me. I am not worthy to appear before thee, nor even
to lift up my eyes before thy throne. From the depth of my misery
I cry out to thee: O Lord, hear my voice, and be merciful to a
poor sinner! Thy mercies surpass all thy works; thou willest not
my death but my conversion; nor didst thou come to call the just,
but sinners to repentance. Thou art always mindful of thy word,
on which I rely: receive thy prodigal child, nor let me
henceforth be ever separated from thee.

{94}

Though I have sinned, O Lord, and done evil in thy sight, yet I
shall never say, as Cain did, that "my crimes are too great to be
forgiven." I know that in mercy thou dost display thy power; and
that though my sins were multiplied in number even beyond the
grains of sand in the sea, atoms in the air, or drops of water in
the ocean, yet thy mercies are still infinitely greater. Without
this consideration I should certainly despair. But thine own
repeated assurances, and the frequent proofs thou hast given of
thy tenderness towards sinners, support my confidence in thee
whenever my enemy attempts to weaken it. Thou art truth itself;
and therefore thy word can never deceive us. Thou hast declared
that thou wilt entirely forget the iniquities of the sinner, if
he be truly converted, and cease to do evil; thou hast told us,
that a contrite and humble heart shall always find favour with
thee. Thy sacred oracles are full of these sweet consolations,
and thy invariable conduct towards sinners speaks the same
soothing language. Thou didst pardon David, though his sin was
most grievous; Magdalen, a sinner by profession; Peter, who
denied thee with oaths; the adulteress, convicted in thy
presence; the penitent thief on the cross: all these obtained
forgiveness, because they sought it sincerely. Nay more, thy
tenderness was shown even to the traitor Judas; nor were even the
cruel Jews excluded from thy prayers: and shall I not also, O my
God, cry out to thee for mercy?
{95}
Yes; for relying on thy wonted goodness, I shall never be
confounded. My sins are enormous, it is true, and stand always
against me; but the more hideous they are, the more I detest
them. Against thee, O God, have I sinned; and to thee I cry out
for pardon. O that I had never offended thee, because thou art
infinitely good. O that my sorrow for having offended thee were
as great as my offences. O that I might grieve for them even unto
death, and feel those bitter pangs with which thy soul was
overwhelmed in the Garden of Olives. Let the inexpressible
anguish of mind thou didst there feel, thy sighs, thy tears, thy
fainting, and thy bloody sweat, O Lord! plead now in my behalf,
and supply the defects of my imperfect sorrow. Let them draw down
thy mercies, O heavenly Father, and restore me again to thy
favour.

I have now before me, O Lord, a sad prospect of the manifold
offences by which I have displeased thy divine Majesty, and which
I am assured will appear in judgment against me, if I repent not,
and my soul be not disposed by a hearty sorrow, to receive thy
pardon. But this sorrow, O Lord, this repentance, must be thy
free gift; and if it come not from the hand of thy mercy, all my
endeavours will be in vain, and I shall be for ever miserable.
Have mercy therefore on me, O Father of Mercies! and pour forth
into my heart thy grace, whereby I may sincerely repent of all my
sins.
{96}
Give me a true contrition, that I may bewail my past miseries and
ingratitude, and grieve from the bottom of my heart for having
offended so good a God. Permit me not to be deluded with a false
sorrow, as, I fear, I have been too often, through my own
weakness and neglect; but let it be now thy gift, descending from
thee, the Father of Lights, that so my repentance may be
accompanied with amendment and a change of life, that I may be
fully acquitted from the guilt of all my sins, and once more
received into the number of thy servants: through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Thou hast, O Lord, given power to thy church to forgive sins in
thy name. Thou hast promised pardon to those who do penance.
Behold the prodigal child; nay, worse than the prodigal. I have
disfigured and denied my soul, that was created to thy own image
and likeness. I have forfeited my title to that eternity of
happiness which was prepared for me. I have nourished sin in my
bosom, the most poisonous of serpents, and the most hateful of
monsters. Alas! I have offended him by whose blood I was
redeemed. I have been the cause of his sufferings; I have renewed
his death, and crucified him again by my sins. Oh! who will give
sorrow to my heart, and a fountain of tears to mine eyes, that I
may bewail my iniquities in the bitterness of my soul. Have
compassion on me, O most loving Father! I throw myself into the
arms of thy infinite mercy.
{97}
Clothe me with thy grace, and admit me to thy sacrament of
reconciliation. Cast out of my heart whatever thou knowest
profanes, or defiles thy temple. Root out of my soul whatever is
displeasing unto thee, and lay in me the foundation of a new
life. I renounce and utterly detest all my sins, for the love of
thee. O my God of infinite bounty and goodness! I am heartily
sorry for having offended thee. I beg and hope for pardon,
through the merits of thine only Son, my Saviour, Jesus Christ.
Accept his passion and death in satisfaction for my offences, and
for his sake have mercy on me, who place my whole trust and
confidence in thee. Amen.



          A Prayer To The Blessed Virgin.

O holy Virgin, Mother of God, and sure refuge of penitent
sinners, intercede for me at this moment, that the confession
which I am about to make may not render me more guilty, but may
obtain for me the remission of all my sins, and the necessary
graces to avoid them hereafter. Amen.


         A Prayer At Receiving Absolution.

O merciful God, as at the words of thy angel, St. Peter was
immediately restored to liberty, by the chains falling off from
his feet; so grant, dear Lord, that by the words of this holy
sacrament, pronounced by thy priest, the chains of my sins may be
loosed, and all my offences pardoned. Amen.

Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me. O God, be merciful to me a
sinner. O Thou who suffered for me, have mercy on me. Sprinkle me
with thy blood, O Jesus, and I shall be made whiter than snow.

{98}

             Prayers After Confession.

Is it possible, O my God, that having been a criminal but a few
moments ago, I should now be cleansed from my sins by virtue of
this sacrament? Yes, I firmly believe it; because thou hast left
to thy church the power of forgiving sins, and hast inclined my
heart to comply with the necessary conditions for obtaining
pardon. Thou hast declared to thy apostles, that "whatever they
should loose on earth, should be loosed also in heaven; and that
whosoever sins they should forgive, should be forgiven." This is
the sacred warrant of their tribunal, whose authority thy
faithful have ever acknowledged. Here are the keys of thy
heavenly kingdom, solemnly made over to thy church in our favour;
we are therefore obliged to have recourse to them. This power was
not confined to the apostles, no more than the power of baptising
nations; but being granted in as general terms, doth in like
manner, extend to their successors. I give thee thanks, O my God,
for this tender proof of thy love, and invite all creatures to
glorify thee for it. Thou hast invested a power in the sons of
men, which thou wouldst not confer on angels or archangels;
_whatever ye shall bind on earth, &c._ was not addressed to
them.
{99}
"The princes of this world have dominion only over the body, but
the power of the priest affects the very soul. The eternal Father
hath given all power to his Son; but then I behold this very
power delivered by the Son to mortals. The Jewish priests could
only pronounce those clean whose bodies had been already cleansed
from the leprosy; but to our priests it was given, not merely to
_pronounce clean_, but really to _cleanse_, not the
infections of the body, but the very stains of the
soul."--[_St. Chrys. b._ iii. _of the Priesthood_.]
"Thus thy manifold mercy hath provided succour for human frailty;
that as by baptism, so also by penance, the hope of life should
be renewed; for Christ Jesus, our Mediator, authorized the rulers
of his church to impose penance upon persons confessing, and to
admit them, thus purified by wholesome satisfaction, to share in
the sacraments."--[_St. Leo. ep._ 23.] This is an effect of
that precious blood which thou, O amiable Redeemer, hast shed for
my sake: I acknowledge the wonders of thy love in accepting this
poor satisfaction, in pardoning all, in forgetting all, instead
of punishing me as I deserved. It is necessary to be what thou
art, a God of infinite goodness, to deal in such a compassionate
manner with so miserable a sinner: and therefore, I humbly
beseech thee to imprint on my heart a just sense of this favour,
that I may gratefully remember it all the days of my life, and
extol without ceasing the multitude of thy mercies. Amen.

{100}

O most sweet Lord Jesus! graciously vouchsafe to remember all
those holy thoughts that have passed in thy divine mind from the
beginning of the world to this very moment, and particularly thy
tender design in becoming man for the redemption of the world:
pardon, through the merits of these, not only all the evil
thoughts and vain imaginations I have ever conceived of myself,
but also those I might have excited in the minds of others. Amen.

O most pious Lord Jesus! I, a poor sinner, do humbly remind thee
of all those words of salvation which have ever fallen from thy
sacred lips, or which others have uttered, or shall hereafter
utter, to the glory of thy holy name. I earnestly beseech thee,
through these divine expressions, to forgive whatever I have
spoken offensive to thee, or what others, through my means, may
have sinfully uttered. Amen.

O most amiable Lord Jesus Christ! look on all the good works thou
has performed for our salvation; and be pleased now to pardon
whatever I have committed against thee. Mercifully direct all my
thoughts, words, and actions, to thy greater glory, and regulate
them by the model of thine own blessed life. Amen.

O Jesus Christ, Saviour of the world, who invitest the sinner to
return to thee, kindly receiving, refreshing, and consoling him,
remember that with thy precious blood thou wert pleased to redeem
me. To thy sacred wounds I fly for refuge; and as in thy mercy
thou didst pray for thine enemies, and pour forth thy life for
thy persecutors and tormentors, so impart here to me the benefit
of thy passion; Grant I may never again crucify thee by mine
offences, but that sincerely grieving for what is past, and
resolutely striving against future temptations, I may fervently
persevere in thy service to the end.

{101}

Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my whole being. O Jesus, Son of
David, have mercy on me.

Receive, O Lord, in thy great mercy, the poor remains of my life.
I am heartily sorry for the years I have misspent; they have
vanished as a shadow, they have passed away without fruit; but as
I cannot recall them, suffer me at least to think of them in the
bitterness of my soul. Suffer me no longer to yield to my
accustomed failings. Let the ardour with which I pursued a life
of sin, be henceforth more diligently applied to thy service,
that where sin hath abounded, thy grace may still more abound.
Remember, O Lord Jesus! that it is not thy desire to lose any of
those whom thy Father hath given thee, but rather to have mercy
always, and to spare; to destroy no one, but to save all; because
thy Father hath sent thee into the world, not to judge the world,
but to grant us life through thee. May, therefore, O Lord, thy
boundless merits plead for me now, and at my last moments, that I
may obtain the full remission of my sins; that I may truly know
thee; that I may ever love thee; that I may tend to thee
incessantly; and at length arrive to the eternal enjoyment of
thee, who, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, livest and
reignest, &c. Amen.

{102}

I sincerely detest all my sins, and am fully resolved, O Lord,
through the assistance of thy divine grace, never to offend thee
hereafter. I therefore earnestly beseech thee to confirm all
those good resolutions I have made. Increase my fervour in thy
service, and render it efficacious, that my change of life may be
visible to all, and that in future my conduct may be as edifying
as it has been heretofore scandalous.
Amen.

O that I had never sinned! O that I had never transgressed thy
commands, my God! Happy those souls who have preserved their
innocence, and never lost that grace they received at the
baptismal font! Most loving Father, I have sinned against heaven
and before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy child. I
confess my ingratitude, and seek refuge in thy mercy. I have
wandered like a sheep that is gone astray; but have compassion on
me, and save me. Forgive me what is past; and through the bowels
of thy infinite goodness, grant me a true steadiness of spirit,
that from this moment I may never offend thee more.

O blessed Virgin Mary, my holy patron, [_name him or her,_]
and all ye Saints and Angels, praise and extol our Lord for his
boundless goodness towards me a most miserable sinner. Beseech
him to accept of this my humble confession, and to supply,
through his infinite mercies, all its deficiencies. Beg of him to
ratify in the archives of heaven, the sentence of absolution
which his minister, the priest, hath pronounced in my favour at
the tribunal of confession. Amen.

{103}

            Instructions For Communion.

  As there is no religious duty of greater consequence, or more
  conducive to our happiness both here and hereafter, than to
  receive worthily the blessed Eucharist; so there can be no
  greater favour conferred on a Christian, than to communicate
  early in life, and afterwards frequently. Hence it becomes the
  indispensable duty of such as have the education of children
  committed to their care, not only to impress on their tender
  minds a lively and active sense of the excellency of this
  sacrament, but also to enforce the necessity of frequently
  receiving it. "He that eateth this bread shall live for
  ever."--_John_, vi. The obligation of communicating at
  Easter is binding on every member of the church who has arrived
  at the age of discretion; i.e. when reason and reflection, guided
  by the gift of divine faith, arrive at such a state of maturity,
  as may enable them to distinguish the flesh of Jesus Christ,
  under the exterior appearance of bread and wine, from the
  ordinary food of the body. It is further to be observed, that
  as purity of heart is the most proper disposition to receive
  worthily; so, of consequence, the less advanced the age of a
  Christian, the more untainted, in general, is his baptismal
  innocence. But, on the other hand, it is to be remarked, that
  the longer a Christian defers his first communion, the greater
  is the danger that either domestic affairs, or the violence of
  those passions to which young persons in general are more or
  less subject, should cause him to put it off to a more advanced
  age, or perhaps to the very hour of death!--_a fatal
  delusion_, which has betrayed numbers of Christians into the
  abyss of eternal perdition.
{104}
  Let parents, therefore, and others concerned in the education
  of children, attend to the advice of the great St. Charles
  Borromeus on this subject: "When children," says he, "of both
  sexes, arrive at the age of ten years, provided they are
  capable of being easily prepared for communion, suffer them
  not, under pretence of ignorance, (as it is often the case,) to
  defer it any longer; but rather let them be prepared in good
  time, to participate of a sacrament which abounds with such
  precious and inestimable advantages."

  With respect to frequent communion, the best advice is to
  follow the counsel of a wise and prudent director. But
  remember, that according to the spirit of Jesus Christ and his
  church, you should communicate frequently. Our divine Redeemer
  gives himself to us in the blessed Eucharist under the forms of
  bread and wine, hereby intimating, that as our corporal life
  cannot be supported without the ordinary food of the body, so
  our spiritual life cannot be maintained but by the blessed
  Eucharist, which is the food and nourishment of our souls.
  Hence it is that he assumes the most tender and affectionate
  titles of spouse, brother, friend, &c. in order to incite us to
  approach him frequently in this divine sacrament.

  The spirit of the church is further made known by the advice of
  the holy Council of Trent, which exhorts all the faithful to
  communicate often, and particularly whilst they assist at the
  celebration of the divine mysteries. To those testimonies may
  be added the exhortations of the holy fathers, the example of
  the saints, the practice of the primitive Christians, and the
  experience of all pious and devout persons in every age, as so
  many corroborating proofs of the happiness and advantage of
  frequent communion.

  But if it be a happiness to communicate early in life, and
  frequently during the course thereof, it may be also said that
  there cannot be a greater misfortune than to communicate
  unworthily; it being a most flagrant abuse of what is most
  sacred in religion. To avoid then so great an evil, reflect
  seriously on these words of St. Paul: "Let a man _prove
  himself_, and so eat of that bread, and drink of that
  chalice; for he that eateth and drinketh _unworthily_,
  eateth and drinketh _damnation_ to himself, not discerning
  the body of the Lord." Now this _proving_ consists in
  putting yourself into such a state, that your conscience may
  not reproach you with any essential obstacle to the receiving
  of this sacrament, that is, with the conscious guilt of any
  mortal sin whatever.
{105}
  This you can answer for, provided you have endeavoured to make
  as exact, as fervent, and as perfect a confession as you would
  wish to make at the hour of death; and you should certainly be
  equally careful and fervent in so doing, there being not less
  purity required to receive Jesus Christ in this life, than to
  appear before the judgment-seat of God in the next.

  Above all things it must be remembered, that the essential
  point in this _proving_ of yourself, is, "_to quit the
  occasions of sin, and to repair the scandal it hath
  caused:_" without a fixed determination of so doing, the
  accusation and detestation of it are absolutely insufficient.

  But this purity of conscience, which exempts from mortal sin,
  and every criminal attachment, though it may prevent the
  communion from being sacrilegious, yet it is not sufficient to
  render it so fruitful and advantageous as it should be.
  Wherefore, the more you prepare yourself for this sacrament,
  the greater abundance of grace you will require. In order,
  then, to prevent the mistake of such as do not think it
  necessary to prepare for receiving this holy sacrament before
  the very day of communion, the following pious practices are
  earnestly recommended:

  I. Some days before communion perform all your actions and
  prayers, in order to obtain the graces necessary for so
  important a duty. Offer them up in the morning with this
  intention, and do some good work, such as an alms, an act of
  mortification, or a fast, with the same design.

  II. Visit our Lord in the blessed sacrament morning and
  evening, to beg that he would himself by his grace dispose your
  heart to receive him worthily.

  III. Read every day a chapter out of the 4th Book of the
  _Imitation of Christ_, or some other approved book that
  treats of the Eucharist.

  IV. On the eve of your communion be more recollected than
  usual: think often upon the happiness you are to enjoy the
  ensuing day in receiving your God. As this should be your last
  thought at composing yourself to rest, so it should also be
  your first at awaking.

  V. Represent to your imagination that your angel guardian
  addresses you in these words: "Behold the spouse cometh: go
  forth now and meet him." Arise as early as possible to receive
  the great guest, who designs to honour you with this visit.
  Keep a profound silence till you return from mass; and let it
  appear by your modesty and recollection, that you are deeply
  penetrated with the consciousness of the sanctity of an action
  of the most ineffable dignity and excellence.

{106}

  VI. Whenever you go to communion have always in your mind some
  particular intention--such as the acquiring of some virtue;
  overcoming such a temptation; the knowing of God's will with
  regard to yourself; the relief of the souls of the faithful
  departed; the conversion of infidels, heretics, and of sinners
  in general; for nothing is more capable of exciting fervour in
  devotion, than some particular end to which it is referred.


           A Prayer To The Blessed Virgin.

O sacred Mother of God, pure and spotless Virgin! thou didst not
bear the Saviour of the world in thy sacred womb for thine own
sake alone, but for ours also. May not I then, O Mother of mercy,
hope to partake of his merits, and obtain, through thy powerful
intercession, some share of the same holy dispositions of soul
which thou thyself didst possess at the time thou didst conceive
him. O that the same divine Spirit which then prepared thy body
and soul for his reception, would now shed his precious gifts on
me, since it is the same God-Man that I am also about to receive.
Obtain for me a pure heart for his dwelling-place, and a firm and
constant resolution to support myself in his grace; but above
all, inspire me with an infinite horror of the detestable sin of
impurity, which, in a particular manner, contaminates the soul of
man, and renders it unworthy of communicating; because, by
dishonouring my flesh, I dishonour the flesh of Jesus Christ
also.
{107}
Alas! if thy immaculate virginal womb was not too pure for a God
to become incarnate therein, how can I presume to present myself
at the table of the God of purity, and receive him into a heart
contaminated with the smallest stain of a vice so abominable in
the sight of infinite purity and sanctity?


            Prayers Before Communion.

I firmly believe, O my divine Jesus, that thou art really present
in the blessed sacrament of the altar. I believe that it contains
thy body and blood, accompanied by thy very soul and divinity. I
acknowledge these truths; I believe these wonders; I adore the
power that has wrought them, the same power that said: "Let there
be light, and light was made." I submit my senses and reason to
thy divine authority. I praise and glorify thy infinite goodness,
which hath prepared this heavenly banquet for the food and
nourishment of my soul. Blessed be thy name for ever. Accept my
homage; accept, O my God, my most hearty thanks. But what am I,
that thou shouldst work such wonders for my sake? How shall such
a filthy sinner as I am, presume to approach thee, who art the
inexhaustible source of infinite purity and sanctity? How shall I
venture to lift up my eyes to heaven, much less to receive thee
within my breast?
{108}
I tremble at the sentence of thy apostle: "Whosoever shall eat
this bread or drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord;" [1 _Corinthians_
ii.] for I acknowledge myself to be nothing but dust and ashes; a
poor, miserable worm of the earth, subject to many vices, and
void of all virtue and merit. Alas! my life has been nothing but
sin and misery. I have nothing to confide in but thy boundless
mercy; nor should I ever presume to approach thy sacred table,
and partake of the bread of angels, were I not encouraged by thy
infinite goodness, and excited by thy own most pressing
invitations. It is therefore in thy mercy, which is above all thy
works, that I put my whole trust; and since thou art pleased to
call me to this divine banquet, behold I come to it, like
Magdalen, to be happily united to thee, and to lay down all my
sins at thy feet, to be cancelled by thy precious blood. I come
to commemorate thy sufferings, as thou thyself hast ordained. I
come, as one sick, to the Physician of Life; as one blind, to the
Light of eternal Glory; as one poor, needy, and distressed, to
the King of heaven and earth. To thee I expose all my wounds,
that they may be healed. To thee I fly for protection, hoping
that thou wilt be to me a Saviour, and that thou wilt wash away
every sin that may defile me. Remove my blindness, relieve my
necessities, and clothe me with grace, that I may receive the
adorable sacrament of thy body and blood with such reverence and
humility, such contrition and devotion, such purity and faith, as
may be for thy honour and glory, and the salvation of my soul.
{109}
I am not worthy, O Lord, to receive thee; alas, I am not! but
thou canst, if thou wilt, make me worthy: say but the word, then,
and my soul shall be healed. Thou hast heretofore said to the
leper in the gospel, "I am willing; be thou healed;" and he was
immediately cured of his disease. My soul is covered with an
universal leprosy: heal me then, O my Saviour, in like manner;
cleanse my soul from its stains; remove from it all guilt;
extinguish in it every evil disposition; adorn it with the
necessary virtues, and make it a fit abode for thy reception. May
the body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life
everlasting.


                  Another Prayer.

Who is he whom thou art about to receive? O my soul, be still and
attentive. Who is he thou art going to receive? Thy God! thy
Redeemer! who, for love of thee, shed torrents of blood during
his agony in the garden of Gethsemani! who for love of thee,
suffered his sacred head to be pierced with a crown of thorns,
and his virginal flesh to be rent and torn at the pillar with
whips and scourges! who, for love of thee, suffered himself to be
clothed in a purple garment, and derided as a mock king, with a
reed for his sceptre! who, for love of thee, suffered his sacred
hands and feet to be fastened with gross nails to the wood of the
cross! in fine, who, for love of thee, hung thereon, in the most
ignominious manner, between two thieves, suffering for the space
of three hours the most excruciating pains and tortures! and at
last expired for thy redemption!
{110}
After such stupendous instances of thy love for man, who can
refuse a return of love to thee, Lord Jesus? I love thee, O my
God! and ardently wish, that as every breath I draw is an
increase of my life, so it may be of my love for thee, till at
last I love thee as thou thyself requirest, "with my whole heart,
with my whole soul, with all my mind, and with all my strength;"
for thou art the God of my heart, and the life of my soul; thou
art my treasure, my joy, my comfort, my support, my strength, my
armour, my defence, my only hope and comfort in this place of
banishment and vale of tears, and the supreme object of my
happiness in heaven.

As the wearied stag pants after the fountains of water, so does
my soul languish after thee, the ocean of all sweetness; it
thirsts after thee with the most vehement desire, and longs to
drink plentifully of those fountains which issue from the
inexhaustible source of thy infinite goodness for my comfort and
refreshment. O sweet Jesus! permit me now to experience the
multitude of thy tender mercies. Have compassion on me and save
me, for thou never forsakest such as place their hope in thee.
{111}
Purify my heart with the fire of divine love, that it may this
day become a fit abode for thy reception; O come and make it thy
dwelling-place for ever. I am sorry, and will be sorry as long as
I live, for having ever offended thy infinite goodness; forgive
me, dear Lord, my past trespasses, and be thou my keeper for the
time to come, that I may never more offend thee.

Hail, saving victim, who for me and all mankind was offered on
the cross! Hail, precious blood flowing from the wounds of my
crucified Lord, and washing away the sins of the world! As I now
desire to receive thee, veiled in this sacrament, so I hope
hereafter to behold thee, face to face, in the kingdom of heaven.

O all ye blessed Angels and Saints of God, I humbly beg the
assistance of your prayers and intercession, that I may with a
clean heart and a pure conscience, approach the Holy of Holies,
and receive this divine sacrament with such reverence and
humility as may be for my soul's salvation.



                   Acts Of Virtue,

  _Which may be used with great spiritual advantage before
  Communion, according to each person's leisure and devotion_.


  Imagine that our Saviour invites yon into the same room in
  which he ate his last supper with his apostles, to be witness
  of the miracle he is there going to perform, and to give you
  the communion with his own sacred hands. How fervent soever
  your sentiments might have been on that solemn occasion, they
  ought not to be less so at present: for as he ordained that
  this divine food should be daily renewed for the nourishment of
  the faithful, till his second coming to judge mankind at the
  end of the world, so he gives himself no less to us at present,
  than he did at that time to his apostles.
{112}
  Take them now for your model. The account which we have in the
  gospel, of this last mysterious supper, will furnish you with
  proper acts for communion. Read them attentively; make them
  your own by reflection; and let them sink deeply into your
  heart.


               An Act Of Adoration.

  The Gospel of St Luke, chap, xxii., informs us, that our
  Saviour sat down, and his twelve apostles with him, to eat the
  Paschal Lamb, or accomplish the Supper of the Old Law, and
  institute that of the New in its stead. Who could be otherwise
  than astonished at seeing a God admit his creatures, nay, even
  his very enemies, to partake of his adorable body? "When he
  loved his own who were in the world," says his beloved
  disciple, St. John, "he loved them unto the end." But this was
  loving them, not merely to the end of this mortal life, but
  even beyond it, to the very end of ages with the utmost excess,
  and to the farthest limits of love. Contemplate, therefore,
  with the most attentive recollection, the excellence, the
  depth, and the extent of the boundless love of our divine
  Redeemer, of which this mystery is an epitome.


Could we ever believe, O Lord, or even imagine, that thy love for
us was so excessive, had not thine own infallible word convinced
us of its truth? Hadst thou, when thou wert about to quit this
world, left us thy adorable heart as a pledge of thy affection;
or hadst thou, when thy side was pierced, ordered thy precious
blood to be distributed throughout thy church; such favours would
have justly claimed our most grateful acknowledgments. But this
would not satisfy the extent of thy love; thou didst choose, in a
god-like manner, to penetrate into the very centre of our hearts,
and give thyself to each of us particularly, entirely, and for
ever.
{113}
With what amazement, then, must not the angels and the whole
hierarchy of celestial intelligences, have beheld such a prodigy!
Were they not in some measure jealous to see mankind thus
uncommonly favoured? But what didst thou discover in me, O Lord,
that could thus attract thee? Or what couldst thou possibly
expect from my indigence? Can I become the dwelling-place of him
who is the delight of the blessed? Alas! had I even the innocence
of thy beloved disciple John, or the ardent love of thy zealous
apostle St Peter, I should then have some little claim to sit
down at thy table; but since I am removed at so great a distance
from such holy dispositions, vouchsafe, O Lord, to supply my
deficiency by the effusion of thy grace. Whence is this favour to
me, O my merciful Redeemer? "What is man, that thou art mindful
of him? or the son of man, that thou shouldst visit him?" Psalm
viii.


                 An Act Of Desire,

  Founded on these tender words, which our Saviour pronounced
  immediately before the Supper: "With desire I have desired to
  eat this Pasch with you."--_Luke_, xxii. 15. For why
  should we not feel the most ardent desire to be united to our
  Lord in this sacrament, when we see him so desirous to visit
  us, and take up his dwelling in our hearts? Endeavour to excite
  this desire, by considering how much you stand in need of this
  bread of life, and by the great esteem this heavenly
  nourishment deserves.

{114}

Since thou, O Lord, art so prodigal of miracles, and obligest me
to receive thee under such severe penalties, nothing can be more
certain than that thou desirest to make my heart thy
dwelling-place. With what fervent desires should I not,
therefore, endeavour to co-operate with such bountiful
intentions! O my all-sufficient God, though thou standest in no
need of me, yet thou hast compassion on my poverty. May then the
efficacy of thy grace supply my indigence; may it awaken every
faculty of my soul, and render my desires to receive thee
worthily still more inflamed; for though they are arrived at a
certain anxiety, I am nevertheless sensible of their being too
tepid. Alas! my Redeemer, why do I not sigh after thee with the
same holy fervour as did the patriarchs of the old law, who
expected thy coming? "Come, O Lord, and do not delay." Remember,
O heavenly physician, that thou canst not refuse thy all-healing
balsam to the wounds of my soul, since thy motive for descending
on earth was to heal the sins of men. Although I am needy and
poor, yet thou canst enrich me; although I am enslaved under the
tyranny of my predominant passions, yet thou canst break my
chains and set me at liberty; a single word of thine would be
altogether sufficient to work these miracles in favour of one so
unworthy of thy corporal presence as I am. Speak it then, O
Sovereign Good, for I can no longer live without thee. Let blind
and infatuated worldlings intoxicate themselves with the false,
transient, and fading happiness of this life; as for my part,
nothing besides thyself can content me, either in heaven or on
earth; for what have I in heaven, or what can I desire on earth
besides thee?
{115}
Come, then, O thou Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the
world! Come, thou beloved of my heart! adorable flesh and
precious blood of my Saviour! Come, to nourish, comfort, and
enliven my sickly soul. O God of my heart! let me neither love,
seek, nor think on any other object but thyself alone: for thou
alone art my consolation, my treasure, my joy, my life, my God,
and my all! My heart as eagerly desires to receive thee, as the
wearied stag longs to quench his thirst in the fountains of
water. _Psalm_ xli.


                 An Act Of Fear.

  The Evangelist mentions, that when our Saviour declared to his
  disciples, that one of them should betray him, they were all
  exceedingly afflicted: "Verily I say unto you, that one of you
  will betray me; and they began each of them to say, Is it I,
  Lord? Is it I?"--_Matthew_ xxviii. Let your hearts also give
  way for a moment, to the thoughts of that uncertainty which every
  man is in, of being in the state of grace: examine seriously your
  real dispositions, and have no other confidence than in the mercy
  of God.

If the uncertainty of being worthy of thy love or hatred, O Lord,
made even St. Paul, that vessel of election, tremble, how much
more reason have not I to apprehend, lest some concealed sin,
lurking in my heart, might obstruct the salutary influence of
those graces which thou hast prepared for those who worthily
receive thee in this divine sacrament?
{116}
May not I, perhaps, like another Judas, give thee the kiss of
peace to-day, and basely betray thee to-morrow? or, instead of
coming to visit me as a faithful disciple, dost thou not rather
come with horror and indignation, as to a concealed enemy? How
can I answer for the integrity of my confession, the fervour of
my contrition, or the sincerity of my resolutions? Is it not
custom, or human respect, that brings me to the foot of thy
altar? Have not I still some favourite attachment? and in the
resolutions I have made of relinquishing my vile evil habits,
have I not spared some favourite though dangerous passion? With
the same heart-felt anguish as thy disciples experienced on the
like occasion, I ask thee, O Lord, "Is it I?" But the most
abominable traitor, Judas, asked thee the same question? Is not
my anxiety, as his was, only false and apparent? It is this
thought, O my God, that terrifies me; and it is to thyself alone
I have recourse to preserve me from so horrible a sacrilege. No,
thou wilt never permit me to be guilty of so horrid a
profanation, since thou seest there is no evil I dread so much.
Wherefore, my dear Saviour, after being as diligent as I could in
my preparation to receive thee, I now rest entirely on thy
infinite mercy, "Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful
man."--_Luke_, v. "Have confidence, my child, thy sins are
forgiven thee."--_Matt_. xi.

{117}

              An Act Of Contrition.

  By our Saviour's washing the feet of his disciples, to prepare
  them for this new supper, ("And he began to wash the feet of
  his disciples, and dry them with the girt he had about
  him,"--_John_, xiii.) we are taught not to confine
  ourselves merely to detesting those grievous sins which give
  death to the soul; because we see that the disciples were
  obliged to undergo this ceremony, though Christ already had
  declared them pure, and in the state of grace; ("you," saith
  he, "are already clean;") but we should also endeavour to
  purify our souls, as much as possible, from even the slightest
  stains of venial sin, which is signified by the washing of the
  feet of his disciples.

To transform a soul, so defiled as mine by the ordure of sin,
into a state of innocence and purity, must be the work of the
right hand of the Most High. Ah, my God! I shall never be able to
discover any vestige of that precious innocence which makes a
soul so lovely and acceptable in thy sight, unless I trace back
my whole life to the days of my childhood. But although I have
had the misfortune to forfeit my baptismal innocence by sin, yet
there remains for my consolation this sure anchor, whereby I may
hope to regain thy favour, grounded on thy infallible promise,
_that thou wilt never despise a contrite and humble heart_.

But if even the enormity of my sins had not exposed me to thy
wrath, and consequently to the eternal pains of hell, yet I would
nevertheless sincerely detest them. O my God! do not upbraid me
with mine iniquities; they are always in my sight; and the
bitterness of my regret for having committed them, shall serve as
a continual punishment of my baseness.
{118}
Ah, my Redeemer, though I cannot suffer such an excessive degree
of anguish as thou didst during thy agony in the garden of
Gethsemani, when in a bloody sweat thou didst offer thyself as a
victim to the Eternal Father, yet I am fully determined to suffer
with patience every cross or affliction which may fall in my way,
as well in atonement for the sins I have hitherto committed, as
to prevent me from future relapses. Assist me with thy grace, O
Lord, and remove every occasion of sin at a distance from me: and
as I dread no evil so much as that of offending thee mortally,
rather prevent me, by cutting the thread of life, than suffer me
again to become thine enemy. But in my present disposition of
mind, I do not confine myself to merely detesting all mortal
offences! No, my amiable Saviour! inflamed with thy love, I am
also fully resolved to avoid every venial sin that may in the
least displease thee, or diminish the influence of thy graces.
And though I have a well-grounded confidence that my soul has
been cleansed in the sacrament of penance, still I desire to be
washed more and more from my iniquities. "Create a clean heart in
me, O God; and renew an upright spirit within my
bowels."--_Psalm_ L.

    [Transcriber's note: New American Bible, Psalms Chapter 51:12
    "A clean heart create for me, God; renew in me a steadfast
    spirit."]

                     A Prayer

    For Obtaining The Effects Of A Plenary Indulgence.


Accept, O almighty God, through the merits of thine only Son
Jesus Christ, the intercession of his immaculate Mother the
blessed Virgin Mary, and of the whole court of heaven, the
communion I am about to make, to thy greater glory. Accept it in
thanksgiving for thy innumerable benefits, to obtain the pardon
of my sins, and grace to acquire a victory over my passions,
particularly those to which I am most enslaved.  [_Name
them_.]

{119}

Considering that the debts which I owe to thy justice are so
immense, that of myself I have not the means of discharging them,
I have recourse to the inexhaustible treasure of the merits of my
Redeemer, which thy church (in virtue of the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, which he has committed to its supreme pastors, in the
person of St. Peter,) now holds forth to me. Grant me, O Lord,
the dispositions to obtain such a portion thereof, as may be
necessary to discharge the debt of temporal punishment due to my
sins. Suffer me now to partake of the infinite merits of Christ,
that the immense ransom which he has paid for my salvation being
applied to my poor sinful soul, I may be released from the
punishments which it has otherwise so justly deserved. I beseech
thee also, O most bountiful Lord! to pour down thy blessings on
thy holy Catholic Church; on its supreme pastor, [_Pope N.
N._]; on the pastor to whom the care of thy flock in this
archdioceses or diocese is committed [_name him_]; upon our
queen, and all the royal family; upon all thy bishops and clergy
throughout the whole world. Enlighten poor infidels, heretics,
and sinners; and assist such apostolic missionaries as labour in
their conversion.
{120}
Unite all mankind in the profession of the true faith; give them
the spirit of divine charity, whereby they may love thee above
all things, and for thy sake love each other. Have compassion on
the suffering souls of the faithful departed. Give thy blessing
to my parents, friends, relations, and benefactors; preserve them
from eternal misery; and conduct us all, by thy grace, to the
mansions of celestial bliss, there to praise and glorify thee for
ever. Amen.


                An Act Of Humility.

  Reflect on these words: "And he gave it to his disciples, and
  said, Take ye, and eat," &c. It must have been a great cause of
  confusion to the apostles, when they beheld their Saviour
  distribute to them his sacred body, not merely that they might
  adore it, or that they might preserve it as an inestimable
  relic, but that they might make it their food. Be thou also
  penetrated with the most profound humility.

What am I, O God of majesty and glory, or who am I, that thou
shouldst deign even to look on me? Whence am I honoured with so
unspeakable a favour, as that my Lord and my God should come and
visit in person such a miserable and vile worm of the earth? How
dare a being more contemptible than nothing, approach so holy a
God, eat the bread of angels, and feed on thy divine flesh! Ah,
Lord! it is too much; I am not worthy of so great a favour; I
shall never, no never, deserve it.

{121}

O King of heaven and earth! adorable Sovereign! the Author and
Preserver of the universe! behold, I annihilate myself before
thee, protesting that I would humble myself as much for thy
glory, as thou dost here for my salvation. I acknowledge, with
the most profound respect, the infinite, grandeur of thy divine
Majesty and my own miserable baseness. The contemplation of one
and the other fills me with inexpressible confusion. Can I
possibly say more, my dear Saviour, than to confess, with the
utmost humility, in the words of the centurion: "Lord, I am not
worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof; say but the word,
and my soul shall be saved."


                 An Act Of Faith.

  In consequence of the words pronounced by our Saviour when he
  consecrated the bread and wine, "This is my body," &c; "this is
  my blood," &c; the apostles received what Christ then gave them
  as his _real body_ and _blood_. Do thou now, in like
  manner, make a most lively Act of Faith of the real presence of
  Jesus Christ in the blessed Eucharist.


Since thou, omnipotent God, whose almighty words are creative,
productive, and effective; since thou, O eternal Truth, who canst
neither deceive nor be deceived; since thou, I say, hast declared
that thou art _really_ and _actually present_ under the
appearance of material bread, I therefore implicitly believe it;
for what greater proof can I require of the truth of this
mystery, than thine own infallible word? Yes, my dear Saviour, I
openly confess, and am inwardly convinced, that it is thou
thyself I am going to receive; thou who for my sake wast born in
a manger; thou who for my redemption didst die on a cross, and
who, though now gloriously seated on thy heavenly throne, still
continuest on earth, under the sacramental veils, to feed and
nourish the souls of men.
{122}
Were I to behold thee with my corporal eyes, and examine the
impression of the wounds thou didst receive in thy sacred hands
and sides, as St. Thomas did, still I could not say with more
confidence than I now do, that _thou art my Lord and my
God!_ I do not demand a miracle as a proof of thy real
presence; no, Lord, let me rather have the whole merit of faith;
for thou hast said, "Blessed are those who believe and do not
see."

Wert thou therefore to speak to me from this very tabernacle, the
voice would affect me less than that which resounds in thy gospel
and thy church, founded by thyself, and propagated in a
miraculous manner. Though my senses may tell me it is nothing but
mere bread; yet, submitting them entirely in obedience to divine
faith, I answer it is thy real body and blood, accompanied by thy
soul and divinity. In this faith I am determined to live and die;
and were I to suffer a thousand martyrdoms in testimony thereof,
I am persuaded, that by the help of thy grace I would remain
immovable. "Thou art really a hidden God--a God Saviour."--
_Isaias_. "I believe; O Lord, help my
unbelief."--_Mark_, ix.

{123}

  When about to communicate, let your heart be penetrated with a
  lively sense of the actual presence of your divine Saviour, and
  at the same time endeavour to recollect the different passages of
  Scripture above quoted, they being, as it were, an abridgment of
  the foregoing acts. You may also reflect on the words, "May the
  body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy soul into life
  everlasting," which the priest pronounces at the moment he
  gives you the blessed sacrament; because they imply, that the
  end proposed in communicating, is not simply to abide in a
  certain regularity of conduct for a few months, weeks, or days;
  but to persevere faithfully, to the very hour of death, in that
  state of grace to which a worthy participation of this divine
  sacrament shall now raise you.


                 An Act Of Hope.

Since thou vouchsafest to come and dwell within me, O my
Redeemer, what may I not expect from thy bounty! I therefore
present myself before thee with that lively confidence which thy
infinite goodness inspires. Thou not only knowest all my wants,
but thou art also willing and able to relieve them. Thou hast not
only invited me, but also promised me thy gracious assistance:
"Come to me, all you that labour and are heavy burdened, and I
will refresh you." Behold, then, O Lord, I accept of thy gracious
invitation; I lay before thee all my wants, my misery, and my
blindness; and confidently hope, without the fear of being
disappointed, that thou wilt enlighten my understanding, inflame
my will, comfort me in the midst of such crosses or afflictions
as thou hast appointed I should suffer, strengthen me in all
temptations and trials, and in fine, with the powerful assistance
of thy grace, change me into a new creature; for art not thou, O
God, the master of my heart; and when shall my heart be more
absolutely disposed of by thee, than when thou shalt have once
entered into it?

{124}

                  Devout Prayers,

              Or Fervent Aspirations

                  After Communion.


I return thee most hearty thanks, O amiable Jesus, for the
inestimable blessing I now enjoy. I praise and glorify thee with
my whole soul, for the numberless favours I have received from
thy bounty. I adore thee now reposing within my breast. O my God
and my all! a thousand times welcome. May thy holy name be for
ever blessed! O Sovereign Lord of Heaven! how amazing is the
excess of thy goodness, in condescending to visit so poor, so
vile, so abject a creature as I am! Thou hast vouchsafed to heap
thy favours on dust and ashes; to come into this poor cottage,
this house of clay, my earthly habitation; and to feed my soul
with the heavenly banquet of thy most precious body and blood. O
teach me to entertain thee as I ought, and to make thee some
suitable return for this thy infinite love. I would gladly make
thee some offering in acknowledgment of the rich present thou
hast made me, in giving thyself to me; but, alas! dear Lord, thou
knowest my poverty, and that I have nothing worthy of thy
acceptance; nothing but what, on a thousand titles, is already
thine. But, O my bountiful Saviour, such is thy goodness, that
thou wilt be contented with the little I can give thee, although
it be thine already.
{125}
Thou askest nothing but my heart, and this I most willingly offer
thee. O be pleased to accept it, and make it wholly thine for
ever. Take full possession thereof; I offer it to thee without
reserve. I desire to consecrate it entirely to thy service.
Disengage it therefore, from this moment, from the slavery of its
passions and vices. Stifle in it every desire but that of loving
and pleasing thee. Inflame it with the fire of divine charity,
that it may ever burn with thy love. O may the sweet flames
thereof consume my soul, that so I may die to the world for the
love of thee, who hast vouchsafed to expire on the cross for the
love of me. I cast myself entirely into the arms of thy mercy,
and offer thee my whole being; my body with all its senses, and
my soul with all its powers; that as thou hast honoured them both
by thy real presence, so they may both be thy temple for ever. O
sanctify and consecrate eternally to thyself this mansion, which
thou hast, by a wonderful condescension, chosen this day for
thine abode; and grant that, like Zacchæus, I may obtain thy
benediction. I offer thee my memory, that it may be ever
recollected in thee; my understanding, that it may be always
directed and enlightened by thy truth; and my will, that it may
be ever conformable to thine. O take me entirely into thy hands,
with all that I have, and all that I am; and let nothing
henceforward, either in life or death, ever separate me from thee
any more.
{126}
Make me according to thy own heart; and let my soul be thy
habitation for ever. Draw me most powerfully after thee, and
guide my steps, that I may cheerfully run into the paths of
virtue, and walk in the way of thy precepts. Make me diligent in
the duties of my calling and state of life, and teach me to do
thy will in all things. Let thy blessing be upon all my actions,
and thy grace direct my intentions, that the whole course of my
life, and the principal design of my heart, may ever tend to the
advancement of thy glory, the good of my neighbour, and the
eternal salvation of my soul. Amen.

O my soul, bless the Lord; and let all that is within thee praise
and magnify his holy name. Pay him the best homage thou art able,
and invite heaven and earth to join with thee in glorifying him
for ever. O my God! that I could now give thee as much praise,
honour, and glory, as the blessed spirits incessantly give thee
in heaven! O that I could adore thee with the spirit and
affection of thine elect! But as I am unable to do this, accept
at least this my desire and good will. O ye angels and saints,
bless my God for me; thank my Lord for me; love my Jesus for me;
and sing forth his praises in supply of my defects. O beauty ever
ancient and always new! too late have I known thee; too late have
I loved thee. When shall I live only in thee, by thee, and for
thee alone. O my God, and my all, when shall I see the day, when
shall the happy time arrive, that, disgusted with the false
happiness of this deceitful world, I shall seek comfort from thee
alone, and find rest to my soul?
{127}
O heavenly manna! O adorable sacrament! O inestimable pledge of
God's love to mankind! O standing memorial of Christ's passion
and death! O inexhaustible fountain of divine grace! O boundless
mercy! O divine charity! O sacred fire, ever burning and never
decaying! Hail, O loving Jesus, my only pleasure and delight, the
joy of my soul, and my portion for ever. Let my soul be sensible
of the sweetness of thy presence. Let me taste how sweet thou
art, O Lord. Purify my heart from the dross of all earthly
affections. Deliver me from my vicious customs. Remove me from
all baneful effects of concupiscence. Perfect me in charity,
patience, humility, obedience, and all other virtues. May I
rather die than ever more offend thee by mortal sin! O may I
prove my gratitude by my fidelity to so good a God! Abolish the
reign of sin, and establish the kingdom of grace in all hearts.
Let the light of thy countenance so shine upon all those who are
in the darkness of infidelity, as to dispel their errors. Grant
peace and union to all Christian princes, and preserve us from
the dreadful scourges of war, famine, and pestilence. Convert all
sinners; reconcile those who are at variance. Have mercy on my
parents, friends, and benefactors. Have mercy on all my enemies;
forgive them their sins, and fill both their hearts and mine with
thy charity. Reform all abuses, and remove all scandals from thy
church.
{128}
Comfort all that are under any affliction, sickness, or violence
of pain. Support those who are under temptation; protect those
that are in danger; and grant a happy passage to all that are in
their last agony. Extend thy mercy likewise to the souls of all
the faithful departed, and admit them to the possession of thy
eternal glory. Grant relief to us all in our respective
necessities, the remission of our sins, the grace of final
perseverance, and life everlasting.--Amen.


          Another Prayer After Communion;

  Or When It Has Been Received By The Sick As A Viaticum.

O my gracious Saviour! what greater happiness or comfort could I
expect! O wonderful condescension of my God! O what return shall
I make him for his ineffable love! He whom the saints, the
angels, and the whole heavenly host adore, hath given himself
entirely to me, and now really and substantially dwelleth within
me! Without any other inducement but his pure mercy, he hath
vouchsafed to visit, comfort, and nourish my poor soul with the
divine and heavenly banquet of his precious body and blood, with
which he redeemed me on the cross. May honour, praise, and glory
be for ever paid thee, O my sweet Redeemer Jesus Christ! O that I
could now give thee as much honour and glory as is incessantly
given thee by the whole choir of heaven! Accept, O Lord, my
heart, as a thanksgiving-offering for all thy favours and
blessings. Accept my whole being, for by every claim of right and
justice it belongeth entirely to thee.

{129}

And thou, O my soul, bless the Lord, and let all that is within
thee praise his holy name. O all ye works of the Lord, bless the
Lord, praise and glorify him for ever. O all ye angels of the
Lord, bless the Lord; magnify, praise, and glorify his holy name,
because I have found the beloved of my soul. Prostrate at his
feet, like the penitent Magdalen, I will embrace him in spirit,
and clasp him with the arms of inflamed love. And now, as I have
actually received him on earth, may I not confidently hope for
the perfect possession of him in heaven? I can now fear no evil,
because thou, O Lord, art with me, as my powerful guardian and
protector! Give me therefore thy blessing, O beloved Jesus! and
establish an everlasting peace in my soul. Thou art the God of my
heart, my portion and inheritance for ever. Let nothing in the
future be my comfort but thou, my Lord Jesus; nor let any thing
afflict me hereafter but my sins, and whatever is displeasing to
thy divine Majesty. O soul of Christ, sanctify me; body of
Christ, save me; blood of Christ, purify me; water issuing from
the side of Christ, wash me; passion of Christ, strengthen me. O
good Jesus, graciously hear me, hide me within thy wounds, suffer
me never to be separated from thee; call me at the hour of death,
and command me to come to thee, that I may associate with the
saints and angels, and the whole choir of celestial spirits, to
sing forth canticles of praise and glory to thy holy name for
ever and ever, world without end. Amen, Amen, Amen, sweet Jesus!

{130}

        Acts Of Virtue After Communion.

         To Be Used According To Each
        Person's Leisure Or Opportunity.


  Now, whilst the plenitude of the Divinity dwelleth corporally
  within you, meditate most profoundly, with the Blessed Virgin,
  upon the great wonders which the Almighty hath wrought in your
  favour. Consider yourself as a living tabernacle, wherein
  resideth the Holy of Holies. Let this single reflection prevent
  all distractions, and keep your mind in the most perfect
  composure and recollection.


                An Act Of Confidence.

  "Now there was leaning on the bosom of Jesus one of his
  disciples, whom Jesus loved."--_John_, xiii. 16. What a
  glorious privilege was this which St. John had! What
  consolation must he not have felt from the impression of the
  Divinity! What delightful repose! Pour forth thy heart, as he
  did his, into that of Jesus, and abandon thyself to the most
  lively sentiments of confidence.

Behold! here he is, then, the treasure of my soul! I am now in
possession of the Sovereign Good! O what advantage upon earth can
be compared to this? What glory! what comfort! to feel my God so
near me! "My soul hath found whom she loveth: I have hold of him,
nor will I let him go."--_Cant_, iv. The first thought, O
God! with which thy presence inspires me, is a sentiment of
adoration and respect.
{131}
Permit me, then, in union with the blessed in heaven, to offer
thee my most profound homage. Yes, under these sacred veils,
where thy love for me hath concealed the splendour of thy
Majesty, I most humbly adore thee. I acknowledge thee as my
master, my creator, and the supreme arbiter of my eternal
destiny. The less thou wouldst make thyself for my sake, the more
real respect and veneration have I for thee. But these thoughts
are absorbed in the greatness of my confidence. This I cannot
contain, nor yet am I able to express it. If thou takest pleasure
in, if thou even enjoinest us to place our trust in thee, is it
not in this mystery, where thou dost communicate thyself without
reserve, where thou literally verifiest that tender promise of
_treating us no longer as servants, but as friends?_ These
words, which thou never didst address to thy angels or prophets,
thou dost accomplish for sinners in this sacrament: yes, it would
be an insult offered to thee, not to have the greatest hopes in
thy mercy; for it is not here, O God, that thou exercisest thy
justice; thou art glorious in heaven! all-powerful on earth! and
terrible in hell! but in the Eucharist, thou art mild, consoling,
sweet, and liberal. Ah! what canst thou refuse me, when thou hast
given me thyself? and where is the confidence that can be too
tender? Why should I envy the beloved disciple who leaned on thy
breast at thy last supper, for dost thou not at present rest in
my heart? O let me, then, be for ever inviolably attached to
thee.
{132}
Let the sweets of thy presence so captivate my soul, that
disgusted with sin, it may be fixed in the contemplation of thee
alone, and listen with docility to thy holy inspirations. "All
you, then, that doubt of the goodness of God, come now and learn!
come and admire! come and taste with me his infinite mercies!
come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what
great things he hath done for my soul!"--_Psalm_ xiv. Who
would have believed it? What! one of his disciples, not prostrate
at his feet, but reclining upon his breast, and honoured with his
particular affection! Yes, all this he hath done for him, and is
ready to do the same for me also. "Behold the Lord my Saviour; I
will act confidently, and I will not fear."--_Isaias_, ii.
"The mercies of the Lord I will sing for ever."--_Psalm_,
lxxviii.


                  An Act Of Love.

  "Lord, where art thou going, why cannot I follow thee now? I
  will lay down my life for thee."--_John_, xiii. "How can I
  consent to be separated from thee? (saith St. Peter to Jesus:)
  no; I will never leave thee, were I to follow thee even unto
  death." This is a model of that generous love which a faithful
  soul should testify unto God in the holy Communion.


If I cannot approach thee, O my God, with as much confidence as
thy apostle St. Peter did, yet I come with equal warmth and
sincerity, to assure thee of my eternal attachment. Accept,
therefore, the offering I now make thee, not only of my whole
being, but of all I possess. Unhappy and miserable should I think
myself, were I not in the disposition of mind to sacrifice the
most precious advantage this world can afford, at the first
intimation of thy will.
{133}
Dispose of the life thou hast given me according to thy pleasure.
I offer myself entirely to thee; my employments, talents, and
every power and faculty of soul and body, that they may be ever
and always employed in promoting thy honour and glory. In justice
I am obliged, if necessary, to die for thee, since thou hast
generously given up thy life for my salvation. But thy regard for
me, O sweet Jesus, was not to be confined within the boundaries
of this life; for after having loved me even unto death, thou
hast besides left me this divine food as a sensible pledge of thy
affection. Ah, dear Lord! what more couldst thou possibly do for
me? and how ungrateful a wretch would T not be, if such wonderful
marks of thy tenderness were not capable of exciting the most
lively sentiments of love and gratitude in my soul? The very
damned would then be less culpable than I; for if they do not
love thee, it is because they cannot possibly love thee; and
therefore thou dost not expect love from them. But I can love
thee; because every thing induces me to love thee; and thou art
even mercifully pleased to _command_ that I should love thee
with my whole heart, &c. O thou eternal Beauty! too late have I
begun to love thee: O amiable Lord! who art ever lovely, and
never sufficiently beloved, I consider every moment of my life as
lost, which has not been consecrated to thy love; accept, at
least, the remainder thereof.
{134}
If I cannot love thee as much as I could wish, or as much as thou
hast loved me, or as much as thou dost deserve, yet I will love
thee as much as I am able. Angels of heaven! O Mother of God! and
all ye saints! lend me now your hearts; for I have, alas! but one
to love my God, and that too small, and too much polluted with
the love of creatures. Diminish in me, O Lord, all other
advantages, provided thou dost grant me an increase of divine
charity. I imagine, O my God, that thou art now enkindling this
sacred fire within my breast, and that I could answer thee, with
as much confidence as St. Peter, "Lord, thou knowest I love
thee," and that for thy sake alone; I love thee with my whole
heart, without reserve, firmly resolving never to fix my
affections on any thing besides thyself. Yes, I am content to
find nothing but disgust, bitterness, and affliction, in every
other attachment, that I may be thus happily compelled to repose
in thee for ever. O establish now a solid, efficacious, lively,
ardent, and persevering love within my heart; and though thou
remain therein but for a few moments, let the effectual influence
of thy grace for ever remain behind. "My beloved to me, and I to
my beloved."--_Cant_. xvi. "Thou knowest, Lord, that I love
thee."--_John_, xxi.

{135}

              An Act Of Supplication.

  Our Saviour's last supper was one continual prayer, which he
  offered up for his apostles, and a most pressing invitation to
  solicit favours from him. "O holy Father," says he, "preserve
  those whom thou hast given me; for them I ask. Peter, I have
  asked for thee. Until now you have not asked for anything; ask,
  and you shall receive." Here he exhorts us to pray for all those
  graces we stand most in need of. He further adds a most
  affecting and solid instruction, recommending them earnestly to
  persevere in his service: "Remain," says he, "in my love." He
  forewarned them of the trials they were to undergo; he
  inculcated certain precepts; he reproached them with some of
  their most striking defects. In this manner will he also speak
  privately to your heart; he will make known his will to you; he
  will tell you many things of which you have no notion, or which
  you disguise to yourself. Listen to him then without doubt, as
  the apostles did, and ask him questions with the most sincere
  desire to accomplish his holy will.

Thou are present within me, O inexhaustible source of all good;
thou art full of tenderness, and ready to shed all thy favours
upon me. O shower them down most abundantly! Consider my manifold
wants; consider the immensity of thy power. Transform me,
therefore, into a new man. Divest my heart of whatever is
displeasing to thee. Adorn it with whatever may render me
acceptable in thy sight. Purify my body. Sanctify my soul. Let me
share in the merits of thy life and death. Unite thyself to me;
unite me to thyself. Live thou in me, that in thee I also may
live, and never have life but for thy sake. Grant me those graces
of which thou knowest I stand most in need.
{136}
Grant the same to all those for whom I am bound to pray. Canst
thou refuse me any thing, after what thou hast done for me? What
may I not expect from thee, since thou hast given me thyself? "I
will not let thee go until thou dost bless me."--_Gen_.
xxxii. 26. "Do to thy servant according to thy mercy."


               An Act Of Oblation.

In crowning the innumerable gifts thou hast already bestowed upon
me with the inestimable favour of giving me thyself, thou
desirest to convince me that I should live but for thy sake
alone, O God of goodness and mercy! This, O Lord, is what I also
most fervently wish: I would have all my thoughts, words,
actions, and whatever designs I may form or put into execution,
for the time to come, always directed by a most perfect
resignation to thy holy will. I desire that my health, fortune,
strength, reputation, talents of mind and body; in a word,
whatever relates to me, either interiorly or exteriorly, may be
entirely disposed of to thy honour and glory. I consecrate the
remainder of my life, without the least reserve, to thy divine
service. I now make an offering unto thee of whatever pains or
sufferings I may hereafter undergo in my last sickness, and
cheerfully accept of whatever crosses thou mayest henceforth be
pleased to afflict me with. "Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my
spirit."--_Psalm_ xxx.

{137}

            A Resolution Of Amendment.

  "That the world may know that I love the Father; and as the
  Father gave me a commandment, so I do. Arise, let us go," saith
  Christ, (_John_, xiii.) "instantly and without hesitation,
  to execute his will." Such is the generosity with which we
  should now, and at all times, resolve to execute, in every
  particular, the commandments of the Almighty.

Behold, O my God, the moment is now come, wherein I am to
sacrifice those inclinations to thee which thou hast so often
demanded, and which I was so miserably slothful as to have
refused thee. I now see the danger to which my sluggish languor
has exposed me, and am determined to avoid it. I will labour
incessantly against my vicious habits. I am determined to quit
the immediate occasion of sin. I pledge myself to thee, and am
satisfied to be treated as thine enemy, if these promises be not
most sincere and determined. I will no longer resist thy
inspirations, nor allow myself those pleasures which thy law
forbids, nor expose myself to the danger of offending thee. There
shall be no more remissness in my duty, nor languor in my
devotion. I do not make these promises through a spirit of
presumption, (for I am convinced of my own insufficiency, and
know, that if abandoned by thee, I must necessarily fall back
into all my former disorders,) but being now united to thee, I
flatter myself that, in spite of my frailty, I shall constantly
persevere in thy grace. Why should I not find the same strength
in this divine sacrament, which thy glorious martyrs have derived
from it?
{138}
It was here they imbibed that generous spirit of suffering, which
could brave the power of tyrants, and smile on the horrors of
death. And art thou now less faithful, less liberal, or less able
to fortify me against the attacks of the enemies of my salvation?
No. Come, then, it is full time I should begin the work of my
salvation. Thy will has been sufficiently declared to me; I will
hesitate no longer to put it in execution, how great soever the
conflict may be against myself and the world. In fine, let me
feel, O Lord, an experimental conviction of such a reformation of
life, as may edify those whom my past conduct has scandalized, by
convincing them that I do now _really_ love thee. "Arise,
let us go: I have sworn, and am resolved to keep thy
commandments."--_Psalm_ cxviii. "Confirm, O God, what thou
hast wrought in us.'"--_Psalm_ lxxvi.


              An Act Of Thanksgiving.

  "And having sung a hymn they went out." The apostles did not
  quit the room until they had previously testified their
  gratitude for so signal a favour: and it is our Saviour himself
  who showed them the example; for when he was just going to
  bless and consecrate the bread, he lifted up his eyes to his
  heavenly Father, to return him thanks for having bestowed this
  favour upon mortals: "And giving thanks, he blessed, and
  broke," &c. Conclude your Communion, in like manner, with the
  most tender effusions of gratitude to God.

{139}

When I reflect, O Lord, on the many favours thou hast conferred
on me, I am overwhelmed with confusion, and feel my heart
penetrated with such deep sentiments of gratitude, as cannot be
expressed. I find myself, as it were, encompassed on all sides,
and pressed by thy goodness. It is thou thyself, O Lord, that
lovest me, in all those creatures from whom I receive any benefit
or advantage. My parents, from whom I received my existence, or
my friends, who have given me such proofs of their tenderness,
are but the instruments of thy providence, and the channels of
thy mercies in my behalf. Thou art not only the God of the
universe, but thou art also, in a particular way, my God! So
interested art thou in all that relates to me, that thy attention
seems as if it were entirely fixed on me alone. Thou hast given
me all thou hast made, all that I am, and all that thou art
thyself, cannot I, therefore, with as much reason as David, call
thee "the God of my salvation and my mercy; my refuge and my
support; my treasure and my inheritance?" Nay, more, dost thou
not at present vouchsafe to become my _very subsistence_, by
not only giving thyself to fortify my weakness, and as a pledge
of eternal life, but also that I may be nourished with thy
_very flesh and blood?_ How great, therefore, must my
ingratitude be, if I do not make a cordial return for such
infinite love. O my God, suffer me sooner to forget myself, than
to be ever unmindful of this great favour. Although I have been
treacherous, fearful, and a prevaricator, yet I shall never be
guilty of _ingratitude_, since I should blush at this vice
even in my commerce with men.
{140}
But still, what return can I make thee, being of myself
insolvent, indigent, and miserable? Behold! the treasure is at
hand; the gift I have now received from thee enables me to repay
thee for all thy other benefits: the sacrifice of all that I am
or have, is not worthy to be presented to thee; but in offering
thee thyself, I consider my debts as abundantly discharged. May
thy infinite merits be for ever exalted for having given me such
excellent means of repaying _to the full_, the infinite
obligations I owe thee.--"What return shall I make to the Lord
for all those things which he has given unto me?"--_Psalm_
cxv. "He hath made a memorial of his wonderful works, being a
merciful and gracious Lord: he hath given food to them that fear
him."--_Psalm_ xc.


  Do not limit the devotion of this day to the foregoing prayers,
  but rather consider it as entirely consecrated to Jesus Christ;
  that by this means you may literally accomplish the precept of
  the Holy Ghost: "Let no part of a good day escape without
  profit."--_Ecclesiastes_ xiv. Recollect frequently this great
  action, and read some pious book, to nourish and enliven a
  spirit of devotion. Remark (or, if convenient write down) some
  of those tender sentiments and good resolutions with which you
  were affected at the time of communion; the recollection of
  them will serve as a bulwark to guard you against the attacks
  of tepidity or dryness. But, above all, endeavour to regulate
  your conduct for the time to come, in such a manner as to be
  enabled to say, with St. Paul: "I live, not I, but Christ Jesus
  liveth in me." In a word, let _your Redeemer only_, for
  the future, _think, speak,_ and _act_ in you; and let
  nothing remain in you that is unworthy of him, for no scandal
  can be more injurious to our holy religion, than for Catholics,
  after communicating, to lead disedifying and unchristian lives.

{141}


           The Seven Penitential Psalms.


        Proper to be said on Fasting Days,
        and other Penitential Times.


                     Anthem.

Remember not, O Lord, our offences, nor those of our parents;
neither take thou vengeance on our sins.


                 The Sixth Psalm.

  The Psalmist prays to be healed from sickness, and implores
  pardon for his sins. After obtaining his request, he exults
  over his enemies.


O Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation; nor chastise me in thy
wrath.

Take pity on me, O Lord, for I am weak: heal me, O Lord, for all
my bones are shaken.

And my soul is troubled exceedingly: but thou, O Lord, how long?

Return, O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies'
sake.

For in death there is none that is mindful of thee: and who shall
confess to thee in hell?

I have tired myself with my groanings: every night I will wash my
bed, I will water my couch with my tears.

My eye is disturbed with rage: I am grown old amidst all mine
enemies.

Depart from me, all ye that work iniquity: for the Lord hath
heard the voice of my weeping.

The Lord hath heard my petition: the Lord hath received my
prayer.

{142}

Let all my enemies be ashamed, and very much troubled: let them
be turned back and put to shame very speedily.

Glory be to the Father, &c.


              The Thirty-first Psalm.

  The Psalmist declares all those happy, whose sins are forgiven;
  and, from his own example, and that of the saints, exhorts all to
  seek this beatitude, and to avoid brutal obstinacy. Rewards and
  punishments are proposed.


Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered.

Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed sin: and in
whose soul there is no guile.

Because I was silent, my bones grew old: whilst I cried all the
day.

For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: I am turned in my
anguish, whilst the thorn is fastened.

I have acknowledged my sin to thee, and my injustice I have not
concealed.

I said, I will confess against myself my injustice to the Lord:
and thou hast forgiven the impiety of my sin.

For this shall every one that is holy pray to thee in a
seasonable time.

Yet in the deluge of many waters they shall not approach him.

Thou art my refuge from the tribulation which hath surrounded me:
my joy, deliver me from them that encompass me.

I will give thee understanding, and I will instruct thee in the
way in which thou shalt go: I will fix my eyes upon thee.

{143}

Do not become like the horse and mule, that have no
understanding.

With bit and bridle bind fast their jaws who do not approach
thee.

Many are the scourges of the sinner: but mercy shall encompass
him that hopeth in the Lord.

Be joyful in the Lord, and rejoice ye just: and glory all ye
upright of heart. Glory, &c.


            The Thirty-seventh Psalm.

  The Psalmist, in sickness, and neglected by his friends, begs
  of God to pardon his sins, and to assist and heal him.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation, nor chastise me in thy
wrath.

For thy arrows are fastened in me: and thy hand hath been strong
upon me.

There is no health in my flesh, because of thy wrath: there is no
peace in my bones, because of my sins.

For mine iniquities are gone over my head: and, as a weighty
burden, are become heavy upon me.

My sores are putrefied and corrupted, because of my foolishness.

I am become miserable, and am bowed down even to the end: I
walked sorrowful all the day.

For my loins are filled with illusions: and there is no health in
my flesh.

I am afflicted and humbled exceedingly: I roared in the groaning
of my heart.

{144}

O Lord, my desire is before thee: and my sighing is not hidden
from thee.

My heart is troubled, my strength hath left me: and the light of
mine eyes itself is not with me.

My friends and my neighbours have drawn near, and stood up
against me.

And they that were near me stood afar off: and they that sought
my soul used violence.

And they that sought evils to me, spoke vain things: and studied
deceits all the day long.

But I, as one deaf, did not hear: and as one dumb, that opened
not his mouth.

And I became as a man that heareth not: and that hath no reproof
in his mouth.

For in thee, O Lord, have I hoped: thou wilt hear me, O Lord, my
God.

For I said, lest at any time mine enemies rejoice over me: and
whilst my feet are moved, they speak great things against me.

For I am prepared for scourges, and my sorrow is always in my
sight.

For I will declare my iniquity: and I will think of my sin.

But my enemies live, and are become stronger than I: and they are
multiplied who hate me unjustly.

And they that return evil for good have detracted me, because I
followed goodness.

Forsake me not, O Lord, my God: depart not thou from me.

Come unto my aid, O Lord, the God of my salvation. Glory, &c.

{145}

               The Fiftieth Psalm.

  The Psalmist begs pardon for the sins of adultery and murder,
  not through the Mosaic sacrifices, but through Christ, who was
  to come and establish his church, and by his sacrifice appease
  the injured justice of God.


Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy: and
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
iniquity.

Wash me yet more and more from my iniquity: and cleanse me from
my sin.

Because I know my iniquity: and my sin is always before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil before thee: that
thou mayest be justified in thy words, and mayest overcome when
thou art judged.

For behold I was conceived in iniquities: and in sins hath my
mother conceived me.

For behold thou hast loved truth: the secret and hidden things of
thy wisdom thou hast made known to me.

Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed: thou
shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.

To my hearing thou shalt give joy and gladness: and the bones
that are humble shall rejoice.

Turn away thy face from my sins: and blot out all my iniquities.

Create in me a clean heart, O God: and renew an upright spirit
within my bowels.

Cast me not away from thy face: and take not thy holy spirit from
me.

{146}

Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: and confirm me with a
perfect spirit.

I will teach thy ways to the unjust: and sinners shall be
converted to thee.

Deliver me from blood, O God, the God of my salvation: and my
tongue shall extol thy justice.

Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips: and my mouth shall declare thy
praise.

For if thou hadst desired sacrifice, verily I had given it: with
burnt offerings thou wilt not be delighted.

A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrite and humble
heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good will with Sion: that the
walls of Jerusalem may be built up.

Then shalt thou accept the sacrifices of justice, oblations, and
whole-burnt offerings: then shall they lay calves upon thine
altar.

Glory, &c.


         The Hundred-and-First Psalm.

  The Psalmist begs for mercy upon Sion, that he will raise out
  of it his church, to which kings and people may come and praise
  God.--A prayer of the poor man, when he was anxious, and poured
  out his supplications before the Lord.



O Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.

Turn not away thy face from me: in what day soever I am in
tribulation, incline thine ear to me.

{147}

In what day soever I shall call upon thee, hear me speedily.

For my days are vanished like smoke: and my hones are withered
like fuel for the fire.

I am smitten, and my heart is withered like grass: because I
forgot to eat my bread.

Through the voice of my groaning, by bones have cleaved to my
flesh.

I am become like a pelican of the wilderness: I am become like a
night raven in the house.

I have watched, and am become as solitary as a sparrow upon the
house-top.

My enemies upbraided me all the day long: and they that praised
me swore against me.

For I did eat ashes like bread: and mingled my drink with my
tears.

Because of thy wrath and indignation: for having lifted me up,
thou hast cast me down.

My days have declined like a shadow: and I am withered like
grass.

But thou, O Lord, remainest for ever: and thy memory is from
generation to generation.

Thou shalt arise and have mercy on Sion: for the time to have
mercy on it is come.

For the stones thereof have pleased thy servants: and they shall
have pity on the earth thereof.

And the Gentiles shall fear thy name, O Lord, and all the kings
of the earth thy glory.

For the Lord hath built up Sion: and he shall be seen in his
glory.

He hath regard to the prayer of the humble: and he hath not
despised their petition.

{148}

Let these things be written unto another generation: and a people
to be created shall praise the Lord.

Because he hath looked forth from his high sanctuary: the Lord
from heaven hath looked down upon the earth;

That he might hear the groans of them that are in fetters: that
he might unbind the children of them that are slain.

That they may declare the name of the Lord in Sion: and his
praise in Jerusalem.

In the assembling of the people together in one; and kings to
serve the Lord.

He answered me in the way of his strength: Declare unto me the
fewness of my days.

Call me not back in the midst of my days: thy years are from
generation unto generation.

In the beginning, O Lord, thou didst found the earth: and the
heavens are the works of thy hands.

They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they shall all grow
old as a garment.

And as a vestment thou shalt change them, and they shall be
changed: but thou art always the self-same, and thy years shall
not fail.

The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall
be directed for ever.

Glory, &c.


       The Hundred-and-twenty-ninth Psalm.

  The Psalmist earnestly begs pardon, foretelling redemption
  through Christ.

From the depths I have cried unto thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my
voice.

{149}

Let thy ears be attentive to the voice of my petition.

If thou wilt observe iniquities, O Lord! Lord, who will endure
it?

For with thee there is merciful forgiveness: and on account of
thy law I have expected thee, O Lord.

My soul hath relied on his word: my soul hath hoped in the Lord.

From the morning watch even until night, let Israel hope in the
Lord.

Because with the Lord there is mercy: and with him plentiful
redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. Glory, &c.


         The Hundred-and-forty-second Psalm.

  The Psalmist prays that God would not regard him according to
  his merits, but look upon his miseries, and deliver him from
  them, and also from his enemies.


O Lord hear my prayer; give ear to my petition in thy truth; hear
me in thy justice.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight no
man living shall be justified.

For the enemy hath persecuted my soul: he hath humbled my life to
the earth.

He hath made me dwell in darkness, as those who have been dead of
old: my spirit is in anguish upon me, and my heart is troubled
within me.

I remember the days of old, I meditated on all thy works: on the
works of thy hands did I meditate.

{150}

I stretched forth my hands to thee: unto thee my soul is as earth
without water.

Hear me speedily, O Lord: my spirit hath fainted away.

Turn not away thy face from me: lest I be like unto them that go
down into the pit.

Cause me to hear thy mercy in the morning: for I have hoped in
thee.

Make the way known to me wherein I should walk: for I have lifted
up my soul to thee.

Deliver me from mine enemies, O Lord: to thee have I fled: teach
me to do thy will, for thou art my God.

Thy good spirit shall conduct me into the way of righteousness;
for thy name's sake, O Lord, thou wilt quicken me in thy justice.

Thou wilt bring forth my soul out of tribulation: and in thy
mercy thou wilt destroy mine enemies.

And thou wilt destroy all those that afflict my soul: for I am
thy servant. Glory, &c.


                     Anthem.

Remember not, O Lord, our offences, nor those of our parents: and
take not revenge of our sins.



             The Litany Of The Saints.

Lord have mercy on us.
Christ have mercy on us.
Lord have mercy on us.
Christ hear us.
Christ graciously hear us.
God the Father of heaven,
  _have mercy on us._

{151}

God the Son, Redeemer of the World,
  _have mercy on us._
God the Holy Ghost,
  _have mercy on us._
Holy Trinity, one God,
  _have mercy on us._
Holy Mary
  _Pray for us._
Holy Mother of God,
  _Pray for us._
Holy Virgin of Virgins,
  _Pray for us._
St. Michael,
  _Pray for us._
St. Gabriel,
  _Pray for us._
St. Raphael,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Angels and Archangels,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy orders of blessed Spirits,
  _Pray for us._
St. John Baptist,
  _Pray for us._
St. Joseph,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Patriarchs and Prophets,
  _Pray for us._
St. Peter,
  _Pray for us._
St. Paul,
  _Pray for us._
St. Andrew,
  _Pray for us._
St. James,
  _Pray for us._
St. John,
  _Pray for us._
St. Thomas,
  _Pray for us._
St. James,
  _Pray for us._
St. Philip,
  _Pray for us._
St Bartholomew,
  _Pray for us._
St. Matthew,
  _Pray for us._
St. Simon,
  _Pray for us._
St. Thaddeus,
  _Pray for us._
St. Matthias,
  _Pray for us._
St. Barnaby,
  _Pray for us._
St. Luke,
  _Pray for us._
St. Mark,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Apostles and Evangelists,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Disciples of our Lord,
  _Pray for us._
{152}
All ye holy Innocents,
  _Pray for us._
St. Stephen,
  _Pray for us._
St. Laurence,
  _Pray for us._
St. Vincent,
  _Pray for us._
SS. Fabian and Sebastian,
  _Pray for us._
SS. John and Paul,
  _Pray for us._
SS. Cosmas and Damian,
  _Pray for us._
SS. Gervase and Protase,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Martyrs,
  _Pray for us._
St. Sylvester,
  _Pray for us._
St. Gregory,
  _Pray for us._
St. Ambrose,
  _Pray for us._
St. Augustine,
  _Pray for us._
St. Jerome,
  _Pray for us._
St. Martin,
  _Pray for us._
St. Nicholas,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Bishops and Confessors,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Doctors,
  _Pray for us._
St. Anthony,
  _Pray for us._
St. Bennet,
  _Pray for us._
St. Bernard,
  _Pray for us._
St. Dominick,
  _Pray for us._
St Francis,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Priests and Levites,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Monks and Hermits,
  _Pray for us._
St. Mary Magdalen,
  _Pray for us._
St. Agatha,
  _Pray for us._
St. Lucy,
  _Pray for us._
St. Agnes,
  _Pray for us._
St. Cecily,
  _Pray for us._
St. Catherine,
  _Pray for us._
St. Anastasia,
  _Pray for us._
All ye holy Virgins and Widows,
  _Pray for us._
{153}
All ye Men and Women, Saints of God,
  _make intercession for us._
Be merciful to us:
  _Spare us, O Lord._
Be merciful to us:
  _Graciously hear us, O Lord._
From all evil,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From all sin,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From thy wrath,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From sudden and unprovided death,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From the deceits of the devil,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From anger, hatred, and all ill-will,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From the spirit of fornication,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From lightning and tempest,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
From everlasting death,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' the mystery of thy holy incarnation,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy coming,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy nativity,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy baptism and holy fasting,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy cross and passion,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy death and burial,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy holy resurrection,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' thy admirable ascension,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
Thro' the coming of the Holy Ghost, the comforter,
  _O Lord, deliver us._
In the day of Judgment,
  _We sinners beseech thee to hear us._
That thou spare us,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou pardon us.
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to bring us to true penance,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to govern and preserve thy holy church,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to preserve our apostolic prelate, and all
ecclesiastical orders in thy holy religion,
_We beseech thee to hear us._
{154}
That thou vouchsafe to humble the enemies of thy holy church,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to give peace and
  true concord to Christian kings and princes,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to grant peace and unity to all Christian
people,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to confirm and preserve
  us in thy holy service,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou lift up our minds to heavenly desires,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou render eternal good things to all our benefactors,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou deliver our souls, and those of
our brethren, kinsfolk, and benefactors, from eternal damnation,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to give and preserve
  the fruits of the earth,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe to give eternal rest
  to all the faithful departed,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
That thou vouchsafe graciously to hear us,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._
Son of God,
  _We beseech thee to hear us._

Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
  _Spare us, O Lord._
Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
  _Hear us, O Lord._
Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world:
  _Have mercy on us!_
Christ hear us.
  _Christ graciously hear us._
Lord have mercy on us!
  _Christ have mercy on us!_
Lord have mercy on us!

{155}

Our Father, &c. (_in secret_.)
V. And lead us not into temptation.
R. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


                   Psalm lxix.

Incline unto my aid, O God: O Lord, make haste to help me.

Let them be confounded and ashamed that seek my soul.

Let them forthwith be turned backward, and blush for shame, that
desire evils to me.

Let them be turned backward, and blush, and be put to shame, who
say to me, It is well! it is well!

Let all that seek thee be glad, and rejoice in thee: and let
those who love thy salvation, say always, Our Lord be magnified.

But I am needy and poor! O God help me.

Thou art my helper and my deliverer! O Lord make no delay.

V. Glory be to the Father, &c.

R. As it was, &c.

V. Save thy servants:

R. Who put their trust in thee, my God.

V. Be to us, O Lord, a tower of strength:

R. Against the face of the enemy.

V. Let not the enemy prevail against us:

R. Nor the son of iniquity have power to hurt us.

V. O Lord, deal not with us according to our sins:

R. Nor reward us according to our iniquities.

V. Let us pray for our chief Bishop [_N.N._]

{156}

R. May the Lord preserve him, and prolong his life, and make him
happy on earth, and deliver him not up to the will of his
enemies.

V. Let us pray for our benefactors:

R. Vouchsafe, O Lord, for thy name's sake, to render eternal life
to all those who do us good.

V. Let us pray for the faithful departed:

R. Give them, O Lord, eternal rest:
and let perpetual light shine unto them.

V. May they rest in peace. R. Amen.

V. For our absent brethren:

R. Save thy servants, O my God, who put their trust in thee.

V. Send them help, O Lord, from thy sanctuary;

R. And from Sion protect them.

V. O Lord, hear my prayer:

R. And let my supplication come unto thee.

V. May the Lord be with you:

R. And with thy spirit.


                    Let Us Pray.

O God, whose property it is, always to have mercy and to spare,
receive our petitions, that we and all thy servants, who are
bound by the chain of sin, may, by the compassion of thy
goodness, mercifully be absolved.

Hear, we beseech thee, O Lord, the prayers of thy suppliants, and
pardon our sins, who confess them to thee; that of thy bounty
thou mayest grant us pardon and peace.

Out of thy clemency, O Lord, show us thy unspeakable mercy; that
so thou mayest both acquit us of our sins, and deliver us from
the punishment we deserve for them.

{157}

O God, who by sin art offended, and by repentance pacified,
mercifully regard the prayers of thy people who make supplication
to thee, and turn away the scourges of thy anger, which we
deserve for our sins.

O almighty and eternal God, have mercy on thy servant (_N_.)
our chief Bishop, and direct him, according to thy clemency, in
the way of everlasting salvation, that by thy grace he may desire
the things that are agreeable to thy will, and perform them with
all his strength.

O God, from whom are all holy desires, righteous counsels, and
just works, give to thy servants that peace which the world
cannot give; that our hearts being disposed to keep thy
commandments, and the fear of enemies taken away, the times, by
thy protection, may be peaceable.

Inflame, O Lord, our reins and hearts with the fire of thy holy
spirit, that we may serve thee with a chaste body, and please
thee with a clean heart.

O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all the faithful, give to the
souls of thy servants departed the remission of all their sins,
that by pious supplications they may obtain the pardon they have
always desired.

Model, we beseech thee, O Lord, our actions by thy holy
inspirations, and carry them on by thy gracious assistance; that
every prayer and work of ours may always begin from thee, and by
thee be happily ended.

{158}

O almighty and eternal God, who hast dominion over the living and
the dead, and art merciful to all whom thou foreknowest shall be
thine by faith and good works; we humbly beseech thee, that they
for whom we have purposed to offer our prayers, whether this
present world still detains them in the flesh, or the next world
hath already received them, divested of their bodies, may, by the
clemency of thine own goodness, and the intercession of thy
saints, obtain pardon and full remission of all their sins;
through our Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with thee,
in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.

R. Amen.

V. May the Lord be with you:

R. And with thy spirit.

V. May the almighty and merciful Lord graciously hear us:

R. Amen,

V. May the souls of the faithful departed,
through the mercy of God, rest in peace:

R. Amen.


                    Motives

  _Which should excite us to support the Crosses of this Life
  with cheerfulness, and to persevere till death in the practice
  of Virtue._



  Since all things co-operate for the good of those who love God,
  and as God knows how to produce good out of evil, for whom should
  he do it, if not for those who give themselves up to him without
  reserve? Nay, he even makes their past sins contribute towards
  their good, as is evident in the cases of David, St. Peter, and
  Mary Magdalen.

{159}

  When God lays the filth and deformity of sin before our eyes,
  it is in order that we should be captivated with the beauty of
  virtue; if he cast us flat on the earth, as he did St. Paul, it
  is with a view to raise us up again to a higher pitch of glory.

  If God were not actually our Father, he never would have
  commanded us to say, "Our Father, who art in heaven." What then
  have the children of such a father to fear? Without his
  permission not a single hair of our heads can fall to the
  ground? Since, therefore, we are the children of almighty God,
  is it not the most unaccountable folly in us, to be over
  solicitous about any other concern than that of persevering
  till death, in his love and service? The test of our love
  towards God, is the observance of his commandments; and its
  recompense, no less than the possession of himself. "If any one
  love me," saith Jesus Christ, (John, xiv. 23.) "he will keep my
  word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
  and make our abode with him."

  "When I sent you without scrip or staff," saith Christ to his
  apostles, "did you want any thing?" They answered, "No." Have
  we not suffered afflictions when as yet we had little or no
  confidence in God, and did we perish under these afflictions?
  No. How, then, can we entertain thoughts of despondency, or
  betray a want of courage in adversity? For if God hath hitherto
  protected us, notwithstanding the little or no reliance we had
  on his providence, can it be supposed that he will forsake us,
  when, placing our whole confidence in him, we put on the
  determined resolution of dedicating the remainder of our lives
  to his love and service? Ah! no, he assuredly will not. Why,
  then, should we perplex ourselves with apprehensions of future
  evils, which perhaps will never befall us? or on the
  supposition they did, will not God enable us by his grace to
  support them with Christian fortitude? He commanded St. Peter
  to walk to him on the water; Peter, terrified by the blustering
  of the wind and the turbulence of the waves, and under the
  dreadful apprehension of immediately sinking to the bottom,
  calls out to his divine Master for assistance. When God, in
  like manner, ordains that you should walk on the boisterous
  waves of adversity, take courage and fear not; for be assured,
  he is actually present, and will stretch forth his hand to your
  assistance, as he did to St. Peter.

{160}

  Our condition in this short and fleeting life, is an object of
  little consequence, provided that in the end we are admitted to
  the eternal enjoyment of God and his glory. Do we not, at every
  step we tread, approach nearer and nearer to eternity? Nay,
  have we not our feet, for aught we know to the contrary, on the
  very brink of it this moment? What, therefore, doth it signify
  whether our pilgrimage through life be chequered with
  afflictions or not, provided it terminate in a happy eternity?
  Can we possibly repine under short-lived sufferings, whilst we
  await their recompence in never-ending consolations? Ah!
  whatever has not eternity for its object, is, in reality,
  nothing but fleeting vanity.

  Awake, therefore, O my soul! "Let us cast off the works of
  darkness, and put on the armour of light." Let us humbly
  beseech the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, who
  consoleth us in all our afflictions, to inspire us with the
  same sentiments as the Apostle had when he exclaimed, "Far be
  it from me, that I should glory in any thing but in the cross
  of our Lord Jesus Christ." Ah! were the cross of our crucified
  Saviour but deeply implanted in our hearts, the most bitter
  crosses of this world would then appear as sweet as roses. The
  heart that is impressed with a lively sense of the crown of
  thorns which pierced the tender head of our suffering Redeemer,
  will feel but little or no pain from the trifling scratches of
  worldly afflictions.


                    Devotions

            For Every Day In The Week.

  It was an ancient and pious practice among the faithful to
  dedicate every day in the week to some particular devotion.
  Conformably with this custom, a prayer is here given for each
  of those days, to be said immediately after morning prayers, or
  at any other time of the day, as each person's leisure from the
  necessary occupations of his state of life, may permit. But it is
  to be observed, that the worship of the mystery, or the
  devotion to the saint we purpose to honour, consists less in
  the prayer itself, than in the practical instructions which it
  contains.

{161}

                     Sunday,

  Which by way of pre-eminence over the rest of the days of the
  week, is called the day of the Lord? is happily chosen to
  render homage, in a more special manner, to the most Holy
  Trinity, and to thank those three adorable Persons for the
  inestimable blessings we have received. It would be irreligious
  therefore, if not impious, to spend this day in idle
  amusements, or in the management of temporal concerns, whilst
  we are strictly obliged, both by the precepts of God and his
  church, to sanctify it, as well as every holy-day of
  obligation, by assisting at the divine offices, hearing sermons
  or catechetical discourses, reading pious books, employing
  ourselves in the exercise of corporal or spiritual works of
  mercy, and especially in making solid reflections on the most
  important of all affairs--the affair of our eternal salvation.


           A Prayer To The Holy Trinity.

Glory be to the Father, who by his almighty power hath created
me, and made me to his own image and likeness. Glory be to the
Son, who by his wisdom hath delivered me from hell, and opened
for me the gates of heaven. Glory be to the Holy Ghost, who in
his mercy hath sanctified me by baptism, and who incessantly
worketh my sanctification by the fresh graces I daily receive
from his bounty. Glory be to the three adorable Persons of the
blessed Trinity, which was as great at the beginning as he now
is, or will be for ever and ever.

{162}

We adore thee, O holy Trinity! we reverence thee; we thank thee
with the humblest sentiments of gratitude, for having been
pleased to reveal to us this glorious and incomprehensible
mystery. Grant that, by persevering in this faith till death, we
may see and glorify in heaven what we believe here below on
earth: one God in three divine Persons, the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.
Amen.


                      Monday.

  Although the three adorable Persons of the blessed Trinity,
  concur unanimously in the sanctification of our souls, our
  spiritual regeneration, and all the graces we receive from
  heaven, are, nevertheless, attributed more especially to the
  operations of the Holy Ghost; because these favours being the
  effects of God's love towards us, we acknowledge him as the
  author of them, who is the love of the Father and the Son.

  It is inconceivable what blessed effects this divine Spirit
  produces in the souls of such persons as oppose no obstacles to
  his operations. What abundance of light and strength doth he not
  communicate by his seven gifts, and those fruits and beatitudes
  which peculiarly flow from his bounty, if, with fidelity and
  attention, we are docile to his inspirations!

  Let us then rejoice at being under the conduct of so wise and
  beneficent a guide; let us continually study the motions of our
  hearts; let us follow those which the Holy Spirit produces, and
  which alone can vanquish every evil inclination excited in us,
  either by the corruptness of our nature, or the machinations of
  our spiritual enemy; let us dread nothing so much as to resist,
  or desire nothing so much as to preserve his grace; or, if we
  have incurred the misfortune of losing it by sin, let us have
  immediate recourse to the sacrament of reconciliation, by which
  we may regain it, and live more attentive to our spiritual
  welfare in [the] future.

{163}


           A Prayer To The Holy Ghost.

Author of the sanctification of our souls--Spirit of Love and
Truth! I adore thee as the primary source of my eternal
happiness; I thank thee as the sovereign dispenser of the
benefits I receive from on high; I invoke thee as the beneficent
giver of that portion of light and strength, which thou knowest
to be necessary for me in the practice of good works. Spirit of
Wisdom! enlighten my understanding, fortify my will, purify my
heart, regulate all its motions, and grant me an attentive
docility to all thy holy inspirations.

Pardon, O Spirit of Grace and Mercy! pardon my continual
infidelities, and the unworthy blindness with which I have so
often refused to correspond with the most tender and moving
inspirations of thy grace. I purpose for the future, with thy
assistance, to cease to be rebellious, and to follow the motions
of thy grace with so much docility, that I may be enabled to
taste those fruits, and enjoy those beatitudes, which are
produced in our souls by the influence of thy sacred gifts. Amen.


                     Tuesday.

  We ought to have such profound sentiments of respect,
  gratitude, love, and confidence, towards our Guardian Angels,
  as the dignity of their nature, their tender care of us, and
  the solicitude they conceive for our welfare, require. Let us
  then incessantly invoke their assistance; let us consult them
  in all our undertakings; let us frequently beseech them to
  procure the joint intercession of the heavenly host, their
  companions in glory, in our behalf; but, above all, let us be
  particularly docile to their holy inspirations.

{164}

           A Prayer To Our Guardian Angel.

O holy Angel, whom God, by the effect of his goodness, and the
tender regard of my welfare, hath charged with the care of my
conduct; who doth assist me in all my wants, and comfort me in
all my afflictions; who supporteth me when I am discouraged, and
continually obtaineth for me new favours; I return thee profound
thanks, and conjure thee, most amiable protector! to continue thy
charitable care and defence of me against the malignant attacks
of all my enemies. Keep me at a distance from all occasions of
sin. Obtain for me the grace of hearkening attentively to thy
holy inspirations, and of faithfully reducing them to practice.
Protect me in all the temptations and trials of this life, but
more especially at the hour of death; and do not quit me till
thou hast conducted me into the presence of my Creator, in the
mansions of everlasting happiness. Amen.


                    Wednesday.

  The glorious functions wherewith God honoured Saint Joseph in
  this world, and the rare examples of humility, wisdom,
  patience, fidelity, obedience, and submission, which he hath
  given us, should inspire us with the highest idea of his
  sanctity, and the greatest devotion towards him. Honour him,
  therefore, but more especially by a faithful imitation of his
  virtues. Have recourse to him with confidence, and inspire this
  confidence into others. St. Teresa assures us, that she never
  asked any favour of God in his name but what she obtained.

{165}

              A Prayer To St. Joseph.

Illustrious Saint! who art that good and faithful servant, to
whom God committed the care of his family; whom he appointed
guardian and protector of the life of Jesus Christ, the comfort
and support of his holy Mother, and co-partner in his great
design of the redemption of mankind; thou who hadst the happiness
of living with Jesus and Mary, and of dying in their arms; chaste
spouse of the Mother of God; model and patron of pure souls;
humble, patient, and reserved; be moved with the confidence we
place in thy intercession, and accept with kindness this
testimony of our devotion.

We give thanks to God for the signal favours he hath been pleased
to confer on thee, and we conjure him by thy intercession, to
make us imitate thy virtues. Pray for us, then, O great saint;
and by that love which thou hadst for Jesus and Mary, and by the
love which Jesus and Mary had for thee, obtain for us the
incomparable happiness of living and dying in the love of Jesus
and Mary. Amen.


                    Thursday.

  In order to make some return to that boundless love, of which
  Jesus Christ has given us a testimony in the institution of the
  blessed Sacrament of the altar, let us unite ourselves to him by
  holy and frequent communion. Let us often pay him our homage
  under the sacramental veils. Let us, at least, never omit a
  Thursday without acquitting ourselves of this consoling duty.
{166}
  Let us sometimes present ourselves in the most profound
  sentiments of adoration, before him, as did the Shepherds and
  the Eastern Kings or Magi. Let us, at other times, go to hear
  and receive his instructions, in imitation of his apostles and
  disciples. Let us approach him, like Magdalen, to contemplate
  his admirable perfections, and weep bitterly over our sins. Let
  us again present ourselves before him, after the example of the
  sick man in the gospel, to be healed from our spiritual
  infirmities; or, like the poor, to disclose to him our wants,
  and demand those comforts and graces which our doubts, or the
  tribulations and crosses incidental to human life, may require.
  But on all or every one of these occasions, be careful to
  present thyself before him with that profound degree of
  modesty, recollection, respect, fear, love, gratitude and
  confidence, which a lively faith of his real presence in this
  most blessed sacrament seldom fails to produce.


        A Prayer Before The Blessed Sacrament.

Sweet Jesus! O amiable Saviour! who, by an effect of thy infinite
goodness and love, hast vouchsafed to remain really present
amongst us in the adorable Sacrament of the altar; I acknowledge
thee for my Sovereign Lord and God; I adore thee with the most
profound sentiments of humility; I give thee thanks, from the
bottom of my heart, for the numberless instances of thy love and
tenderness towards me, a most wretched and miserable sinner, who,
for my manifold offences, have rather deserved to be cast into
the infernal abyss, and there punished according to the rigour of
thy severest justice. Penetrated with grief at the sight of my
ingratitude, I come, O God of Majesty! to crave pardon for all
the profanations, sacrileges, and impieties which ever have been
committed, or may be committed against thee, in this adorable
sacrament.
{167}
And O that I could sufficiently express the grief which I
now feel, for having so often appeared before thee with
irreverence, and so often approached thee with so little fervour
and devotion.

Forget, O Lord, our iniquities, and remember only thy mercies.
Accept my sincere desire to honour, and see thee honoured, in
this admirable sacrament of thy love. Yes, I ardently desire to
bless, praise, and adore thee therein, with as much love and
fervour as the saints and angels bless, praise, and adore thee,
encircled with the rays of ineffable glory in thy heavenly
kingdom. O amiable Jesus! I conjure thee by thy precious body and
blood, before which I now prostrate myself, that I may adore thee
for the future with such reverence, and receive thee so worthily,
as to deserve after death to be admitted into thy divine
presence, and with the choirs of celestial spirits, praise and
glorify thee for ever and ever. Amen.


                      Friday.

  It is not sufficient that we carefully avoid whatever can renew
  the passion and death of our divine Redeemer, but we must also
  endeavour to honour them, by every pious exercise which a
  tender devotion can inspire. The holy sacrifice of the Mass,
  offered with this intention; fervent communion; prayer before a
  crucifix; frequent reflections on the sufferings of our Lord;
  voluntary acts of penance, such as fasting on Fridays; patience
  and perseverance under the inevitable troubles and afflictions
  of this life; or, in other words, carrying our cross, after the
  example of our divine Redeemer, and with the same intentions;
  will serve as so many pious practices, by which we may testify
  the excess of our love, and apply to ourselves the fruit of his
  passion.

{168}

           A Prayer To Our Suffering Jesus.

Lamb without spot or blemish!--innocent Victim! whose blood has
cancelled the sins of the world, efface mine, and do not permit
thy sufferings to become useless to me. Jesus, deserted and
forsaken by every body! Jesus, sorrowful and aggrieved! Jesus,
agonized, patient, and resigned! help me to bear, with the like
resignation, all the afflictions thou mayest be pleased to send
me in this life. Jesus, calumniated, despised, and outrageously
insulted! teach me to despise the judgments of men, and patiently
to suffer the blackest calumnies. Jesus, whose virginal flesh was
swollen with blows, mangled with wounds, pierced with thorns, and
covered with blood for love of me! teach me to endure, for thy
love, the pains and inconveniencies of sickness. Jesus, condemned
to suffer the ignominious death of the cross! enable me to shun
the praises of men, and to love the most humble situations.
Jesus, bending beneath the heavy load of the cross! unite my
cross to thine, and enable me to bear it with the like
resignation, strength, and meekness. Jesus, elevated on the cross
for my sake, and who expiredst thereon for my salvation! raise up
my affections to heavenly desires, that living only for thee, and
at length expiring in thy divine embraces, I may be for ever
occupied in singing, forth thy praises. Amen.

{169}

                     Saturday.

  The eminent holiness of Mary, her dignity as Mother of God, the
  glory she enjoys, and the power she has received on earth and in
  heaven, her tenderness for mankind, and more especially for
  such as seek her intercession, or imitate her virtues, are the
  motives which have inspired all the saints with the most lively
  and affectionate devotion towards her.

  Let us also devote ourselves to her, after their example.
  "Devotion to the Blessed Virgin," (says St. Bernard,) "is a
  mark of predestination." The best devotion we can practise with
  regard to her, and that which is most strenuously recommended
  by the saints, is a faithful imitation of her excellent
  virtues; particularly her love of purity and humility, and that
  heroic patience and fortitude under the severest crosses and
  afflictions which she suffered, and wherewith almost her whole
  life was embittered.

  Let us therefore celebrate her festival, by preparing ourselves
  on the eve, and communicating on the day, in her honour. Let us
  pay to her images and pictures that respect and veneration
  which the Catholic church, ever guided by the Spirit of Truth,
  recommends. Let us sometimes recite her office, at other times
  her litanies or rosary, according as the duties of our state of
  life may afford us leisure, or our devotion direct. Let us often
  address her with the utmost respect, attention, and confidence,
  in the words of that beautiful prayer, composed partly by the
  Angel Gabriel, partly by St. Elizabeth, and partly by the
  church, and with the same spirit and sentiments. In fine let us
  have recourse to her in all our wants and necessities, and omit
  nothing to procure her assistance at that most critical period,
  when we stand in most need thereof--the hour of death.


           A Prayer To The Blessed Virgin.

Most Holy Virgin! Mother of God; and, by that august quality,
worthy of the most profound respect from angels and men, I come
to render thee my most humble homage, and to implore thy help and
protection.
{170}
Seated above the heavenly hosts of saints and angels, next to the
throne of the Almighty, thou art most powerful, and thy goodness
towards mankind equals the power thou hast in heaven.

Thou knowest, O most sacred Virgin, that I have been taught from
my infancy to look up to thee as my mother, my patroness, and
most powerful advocate; and thou hast vouchsafed from on high, to
look down on me as one of thy children. I acknowledge, with the
most humble sentiments of gratitude, that it is by the means of
thy most powerful intercession I have received such innumerable
graces and favours from the Almighty. Why then has not the
fervour of my devotion towards thee been equal to thy zeal in
succouring me in my necessities? Alas! the sense of my
ingratitude overwhelms me with shame and confusion; but accept, O
amiable Queen, of my determined resolution to love, honor and
serve thee with more fidelity for the future.

Receive, then, O sacred Virgin, the protestation I now make of
being hereafter entirely thine. Accept the unshaken confidence
which I place in thy clemency and goodness. Obtain for me, most
powerful advocate with thy dear Son, my Saviour, (who can refuse
thee nothing that is conducive to my salvation,) a lively faith,
a firm hope, and a generous, tender, and constant love. Procure
for me such a purity of soul and body as nothing can defile or
contaminate; such a profound humility as nothing can alter or
change; and such patience and submission to the will of heaven,
as nothing can perplex or disturb.
{171}
Lastly, most blessed Virgin, obtain for me such a faithful
imitation of thyself, in the practice of every virtue, during
life, as may procure for me thy powerful aid and protection at
the hour of death. Amen.


  The following short ejaculatory Prayer to the BLESSED VIRGIN
  MARY, has been recommended and experienced by many as an
  excellent preventative against impure temptations.

Through thy sacred virginity and immaculate conception, O most
chaste Virgin, obtain for me purity of soul and body; in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.


                Pious Reflections
            For Every Day In The Month.


  _Translated from the French of the Rev. F. Bouhours._


  The following reflections, on account of their conciseness and
  simplicity, require neither much time nor application to be
  read and understood. They do not merely regard the social
  duties of mankind, like those of Epictetus or Seneca; they are
  Christian thoughts on the important truths of religion, and the
  most elevated maxims of the gospel. They are not only adapted
  for such as, by retirement, are familiarized to the practice of
  mental prayer; but likewise for those who, from their secular
  occupations, are as yet but little versed in the use of
  meditation.
{172}
  Even worldlings are still capable of sometimes elevating their
  thoughts to heaven; for, in whatever occupations persons may be
  engaged, they may always find sufficient leisure for a short
  lecture. If the multiplicity or urgency of the concerns of this
  life will not afford you sufficient time for regular meditation,
  you may at least suffer a good thought to take possession of
  your mind, before the business of the day is entered upon. Such
  is the design of these short reflections; and the method of
  using them is as follows:--Every day in each month, after
  having acquitted yourself of the indispensable duty of morning
  prayer, place yourself again in the presence of God, and read
  the Thoughts of the Day; but in order that you may the better
  comprehend their meaning, read them with deliberation, and the
  most profound attention. After reading the first article, allow
  yourself a short interval for reflection before you pass on to
  the second. Do not rest satisfied with barely conceiving the
  truth of the maxim you read; but after ruminating seriously
  upon it, apply it to yourself; and observe the same rule with
  the second and third articles. But should the urgency of
  business allow you but sufficient leisure merely to read them,
  be satisfied, under the assurance that pious thoughts have the
  same effect on the soul, as a seal has upon melted wax; for,
  should they enter but ever so slightly into the mind, they will
  always leave some impression behind. If you cannot find leisure
  to read these Thoughts in the morning, read them at least in
  the course of the day, or at night before you go to bed. The
  Practical Resolutions immediately following the Thoughts, must
  not be omitted. An act of virtue, or a short reflection, is
  soon made.

  The passages from the holy Scriptures and Fathers, at the close
  of the Reflections, are, as it were, an abridgment or abstract of
  the Thoughts of the Day; they collect, as in a focus, their whole
  strength and sense in a few words. Being short and concise, they
  are easily remembered; being pithy and affecting, they are
  happily calculated to rouse, support, and nourish the soul
  throughout the course of the day. They are as grains of
  essence, which contain a strong and fragrant odour within a
  small compass; or as an ingenious piece of mechanism, which can
  execute a great deal of work in a very little time. Be not
  content with reading these reflections once over; but read them
  over and over again, month after month, till by making a
  lasting impression on the mind, you may reap all the spiritual
  advantages they are capable of producing; for there is always
  something new to be found in the truths of religion; they are
  mines which cannot be too deeply dug into; they are fountains
  whose sources are inexhaustible; but they are also seeds which
  produce little or no fruit, unless they take root by being
  deeply planted in the heart.

{173}

               _First Day_.--On Faith.

1. All that Faith teaches is grounded on the authority of the
word of God. It is from Christ himself that the church has
learned whatever she proposes to the faithful as the object of
their belief. When truth itself is the guide, one cannot go
astray; and there is nothing more reasonable than to submit
reason to faith.

2. Of what use is faith to a Christian, if it be not the rule of
his conduct? If it be the most consummate folly to doubt of a
doctrine which God has revealed, which so many martyrs have
sealed with their blood, and which the devils themselves have so
often confessed, is it not downright madness to believe this
doctrine, and yet to live as if it were supposed to be false? Not
to live conformable to our belief, is to believe just as the
damned do.

3. Faith, then, shall henceforth be the sole principle of my
actions, and the only rule of my life. Whatever it condemns, I
also absolutely condemn. In spite of every natural repugnance, I
will oppose the maxims of the gospel to those of the world, as
often as the occasion presents itself. What does the world
say?--_Follow_ the natural bent of your inclinations, suffer
nothing, &c. But what doth Jesus Christ say?--quite the contrary.
But who is right--Jesus Christ or the world?

{174}

  Thank God for being incorporated with his church, and recite
  the Creed slowly, as a solemn profession of your faith.

"Lord increase my faith." _Luke_, xvii.

"What doth it avail to believe like a Catholic, and yet to live
like a heathen?" _Peter Dam_.


        _Second Day_.-— On the End of Man.

1. God alone is our last end; he did not create us but for
himself. Our hearts tell us that we were made for him; we cannot
disown it without belying ourselves.

2. Every one should have what justly belongs to him; let us then
give ourselves to God, since it is he that has a right to us. If
we be not his children of our own accord, we must be his slaves
in spite of us. We must of necessity live under the dominion of
his justice or his bounty. Which choice shall we make?

3. Every thing should tend to its proper object, and act
according to its nature. If the sun, which is made to shine,
refused its light to the world, it would be a monster in the
universe; nor is that heart less monstrous, which, being made for
God, doth still refuse to belong to him. Do I behave myself as a
creature which belongs to God? Are my thoughts and all my actions
directed to him? Ah, how little do I do, that may be called truly
done for God? What doth all the business in this world avail me,
if I forget the only affair for which I am come into it.

{175}

  Make here a resolution of seeking God alone, and of depriving
  him of nothing which he has a right to.

"Thou art my Lord and my God." _John_, xx.

"He requires you entirely, who hath made you entirely." _St.
Augustine_.


       _Third Day_.--Contempt of the World.

1. From the moment we are attached to the world, we cease, in
some measure, to be Christians. This profane world, so
passionately fond of grandeur, of pleasure, of every thing that
can flatter self-love, is the capital enemy of Jesus Christ;
their maxims, their commandments, their interests, are quite
opposite; they cannot be obeyed at once, we must break off either
with one or with the other.

2. We cannot take part with the world, without a breach of the
promises we made at our baptism. When we renounced Satan and his
pomps, we bound ourselves down, by solemn oath, to trample under
foot whatever is greatest in the esteem of worldlings. What
perfidy! what sacrilege! to prefer the goods of the earth to
those of heaven, and to become idolaters of vanity.

{176}

3. The world has nothing worthy of an immortal soul; it has not
even wherewith to requite its most devoted servants. Its
treasures, its amusements, its honors, may indeed occupy and
disturb the heart of man, but they can never satisfy it. They
are, in reality, but false goods, vain shadows, and illusions;
or, to speak more properly, they are real evils. They make a man
wicked; they can never make him happy. The most brilliant fortune
is not only frail and dangerous, but is often a source of the
most painful uneasiness. There are sighs and sufferings upon the
throne, as well as in chains and dungeons.

  Beg of God to destroy in you the spirit of the world, and give
  you strength to despise its allurements.

"The figure of the world passeth away."--1 _Corinthians_
vii.

"Wo to those who adhere to what is transitory; because with those
things they themselves must pass away." _St. Augustine._


          _Fourth Day_.--Upon Death.

1. A Christian who does not lead the life of a Christian, has
great reason to be afraid of death. What a dreadful account must
he give after a worldly and sensual life! what bitter regret to
have lost the opportunities of saving himself! to die an enemy of
God! O dismal death! O dreadful moment, which concludes the
pleasures of time, to begin the pains of eternity.

2. What would we, at the hour of death, wish that we had done?
Let us do at present what we would then be glad we had done.
There is no time to lose: every moment may be the last of our
life. The longer we have lived, the nearer we approach to the
grave. Our death is not less distant, the more it has been put
off.

{177}

3. What will our notion of this earth he, when we are forced to
quit it? Let us now take advice from death; it is a faithful
counsellor; it will not deceive us. What will become of this
beauty, this money, this pleasure, this honour? What will be our
thoughts of them at the hour of death? In our life-time
appearances often deceive us; but at our death we shall see
things as they really are. Man, whilst alive, esteems the world;
man when dying despises it. But which should we reasonably
believe--man living, or man at the point of death? Ah! how
trifling will the world appear at the light of that torch which
faintly glimmers near the bed of death! But alas! it will then be
no longer time to undeceive ourselves.


  Think seriously on what you chiefly apprehend were you this
  moment to die, and regulate it immediately. Accustom yourself
  from this moment, to perform every action, as if you were to
  die instantly after it. Above all things, observe this practice
  in the use of the sacraments.

"Death and I are divided but a single step."
  1 _Kings_, xx.

"There is no to-morrow for a Christian."
  _Tertullian._


      _Fifth Day_.--On the Last Judgment.

1. _I must one day appear before the tribunal of Jesus Christ,
to be there judged upon the good or evil I shall have done_.
There is nothing more formal nor express in the gospel than this
truth; I believe it as firmly as if the last trumpet had already
sounded to call up all the dead to judgment.

{178}

2. What shall we say at the sight of so many bad thoughts, of so
many criminal actions, of so many graces despised? O what a
terrible day is the day of God's wrath! where the inmost recesses
of the heart shall be openly exposed; where every fault shall be
strictly examined! If the just themselves shall be hardly found
just, what must become of unhappy sinners.

3. What sentence must an impenitent sinner expect from an
offended and inexorable God? O tremendous condemnation! _Depart
ye accursed, &c_, Alas! where shall these miserable wretches
go, to whom you thus give your malediction? To what part of the
world shall they retire when they withdraw from you? Where can
there be so miserable a dwelling? To be banished from the
presence of God! to be accursed of God! O what a shocking
destiny!


  Imagine yourself now before the tribunal of Christ. What are
  you most ashamed of at this very moment? Reflect seriously on
  it, and remember that all your secret sins shall be exposed at
  the day of Judgment, if you do not here efface them by a
  sincere repentance.


"Who shall be able to stand before the face of his wrath?"
  _Nahum_, i.

"Wo even to the praiseworthy life, if without mercy, O God, thou
shalt examine it."
  _St. Augustine_.

{179}

             _Sixth Day_.--Upon Hell.

1. How great would be our horror, if the shrieks of the
damned--if their groans and blasphemies could reach us! They roar
like wild beasts; they accuse themselves of their sins; they
bewail--they detest them. But it is too late; their tears but add
new strength to the fire that torments them. O repentance of the
damned! how rigorous art thou! but ah! how fruitless!

2. Never to see God! to be burning in flames for ever! the blood
boiling in our veins, the marrow in our bones! to be trampled on
by the devils! to have all that is hideous for ever before our
eyes! to have rage, anguish, and despair eternally rooted in our
heart, without comfort or mitigation! O what a life!

3. These wretches are outrageous at having had so many
opportunities of saving themselves, and for having neglected
them. The recollection of their past pleasure is one of their
most sensible torments. But nothing more keenly gnaws them, than
the impossibility of forgetting that God whom by their fault,
they have miserably forfeited.


  Go down in spirit into hell, and inquire of the damned what is
  it that has made them fall into it. Question them upon their
  present state, and learn of them to fear God and your own
  danger.


"Which of you can dwell with devouring flames."
  _Isaiah_, xxxiii.

{180}

"The impious pass from one punishment to another--from the
burnings of concupiscence to the flames of hell."
  _St. Augustine._


  _Seventh Day_.--On the Eternal Torments of the Damned.

1. Can the wrath of God go farther than punishing pleasures which
are so soon over, by tortures which will never have an end? To be
miserable while ever God is God!--can any misery be like it? Is
it not enough that the evils of the damned are extreme? Must they
still, besides this, be eternal? To be hurt by the point of a
pin, is trifling in itself; yet were this pain to last always, it
would become insupportable: _What shall it be then, &c_.

2. O eternity! when a damned soul shall have shed tears enough to
make up all the rivers and seas in the world, did he shed but one
tear in every hundred years, he shall not be more advanced, after
so many millions of ages, than if he had only just began to
suffer. He must begin again, as if he had yet suffered nothing;
and when he shall have begun as often as there are grains of sand
on the seashore, or atoms in the air, or leaves on the trees, he
shall still be as far off from the end of his sufferings as ever.

3. The damned must not only suffer during eternity, but suffer
every moment an eternity entire. Eternity is always present to
them; it enters into their punishment; their mind is incessantly
struck with the endless duration of their torments. O cruel
thought! O deplorable condition!--to rage for an eternity!--to
burn for an eternity! Ah, that we could conceive this, as those
damned souls conceive it.

{181}

  Make an act of faith upon the duration of the punishments which
  the justice of God inflicts for mortal sin. We must at least
  believe, what we are not able to conceive. It is a great
  misfortune for a Christian not to be persuaded of this
  eternity, but by his own sad experience.


"Those who do not obey the gospel,
shall suffer eternal punishment."
  2 _Thessalonians _ i.

"Momentary is that which delights,
eternal is that which tortures."
  _St. Chrysostom._


           _Eighth Day_.--On Heaven.

1. Heaven! thou glorious state! no heart can conceive, no tongue
can describe what thou art! Exemption from all that is evil;
assemblage of all that is good; masterpiece of God's omnipotence;
the price of the blood of Jesus; and more than man can desire.

2. To see God clearly, and as he is in his glory; to love God
without measure; to possess God without ever fearing to lose him;
to be happy in the felicity of God himself; such is the object of
my hope. But a day or two of pilgrimage or exile, and then I
shall be with him for ever.

3. What matters it how we fare here below, provided we be with
Jesus for all eternity? Can I justly complain that a never-ending
happiness should cost me so little? The martyrs purchased heaven
at the price of their blood, and thought it was given them for
nothing. Shall not I then sacrifice my corrupt will for it? O
happy eternity! if men only knew what thou art worth.

{182}

  Excite within yourself a great desire of heaven, and behold the
  earth with a proportionable contempt. Were you filled with a
  proper sense of it, nothing here below could allure or disturb
  you.


"I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear."
  _Psalm_ xvi.

"If the labour terrifies, the reward invites."
  _St. Bernard_.


    _Ninth Day_.--On the Presence of God.

1. God at this moment beholds me, as if I were alone in the
world; or rather, he is within me as an eye infinitely
enlightened, which observes me attentively, and which nothing can
escape. He sees me as clearly as he comprehends himself, and with
as intense an application, as if he ceased to contemplate
himself, in order to study me.

2. Ought I not to be infinitely more ashamed that my sins should
appear in his sight, than that they should be exposed to the eyes
of the whole world? Would I commit in the presence of a servant,
what I dare commit before the King of kings? O what blindness to
fear so much the eyes of men, and so little the eyes of God!

3. The most obscure darkness can never conceal me from light
itself; the most distant and solitary retreats are always filled
with the divine Majesty. Let me shun, as much as I please, the
sight and the company of men, I will find God every where.

{183}

  Put yourself in the presence of God, and see whether there may
  be any thing in you that may offend his eyes. The most powerful
  remedy against sin, is to say frequently within yourself, "God is
  looking at me:" there needs no more to restrain you in the
  greatest violence of temptation.


"All things are clear and open to his eyes."
  _Hebrews_, iv.

"If you be determined to commit sin, seek first a place where God
will not see you, and then do what you please."
  _St. Augustine._


   _Tenth Day_.--Care of our Salvation.

1. The affair of Salvation is, properly speaking, the only
business of man; every other concern, when compared with it,
should be accounted as nothing. The enterprises of kings, their
negotiations, &c, are as the amusements and the triflings of
children. The important and the only affair, therefore, is to
serve God, and thereby save our souls: the whole good--the whole
perfection of man consists in this. It would be irrational, and
therefore degrading to man, to neglect an affair whose
consequences are so great, whose success is so uncertain, and
whose loss is irreparable. What blindness! what folly! to think
only of living, and not to think of living well! to apply so much
time to making our fortune, and so little to the saving of our
soul! "What doth it avail a man to gain the whole world, if he
lose his own soul?"

{184}

2. All creatures are made but for our salvation; they become
useless when not employed for that great end: so that from the
moment a man ceases to labour for his salvation, the sun also
should cease to shine, the planets should stop in their course,
the earth should no longer support him, the angels should abandon
him; he should fall back into his original nothing. He is
unworthy of life, when he liveth not for God.

3. However, the greater part of mankind think less of saving
themselves than of any thing else. Every other business is
carefully attended to, except the affair of salvation. All other
concerns are turned to account. This sum of money must be put out
to interest; this field must be tilled; these lands must be let
at a more considerable rent. All other losses are bewailed,
except the one without resource. Great expenses are incurred for
the body, and nothing at all is done for the soul: from the
manner in which we live, it should seem that our soul does not
really belong to us, but that it is the soul of our most mortal
enemy, or the soul of some brute; or rather, that we have a soul
just merely to destroy it.


  Make now a firm resolution to save your soul, let it cost you
  what pains it will: be of the same sentiment with a certain
  pontiff, who, when a king had asked something of him, which
  could not be granted without sin, replied: "If I had two souls,
  I would give one of them to thee. O Prince, but as I have only
  one, I do not choose to forfeit it."

{185}

"Moreover, one thing is necessary."
  _Luke_, x.

"Where there is the loss of salvation,
there surely there can be no gain."
  _St. Euch_.


    _Eleventh Day_.--On Horror for Sin.

1. How great a loss is the loss of God! Men think themselves
unfortunate when they lose all their possession at law, or by
bankruptcy, or by some other accident. What is it, then, to lose
an infinite God! Unhappy the soul which loses its God by sin; but
far more unhappy the soul who considers this loss as nothing.

2. O sin! how common art thou among men! but how little at the
same time art thou known to them! Playing and amusing themselves,
they become the execration of God. And what play--what amusement
is this? God, who is all love, detests sin with infinite hatred:
should any thing, therefore, be so shocking in our eyes as this
hellish monster.

3. A soul in the state of grace, is beautiful beyond expression!
it is a brilliant image of God himself; the Holy Ghost animates
it. But when mortal sin is allowed to infect it, its beauty is
lost, its light is extinguished, the Divine Spirit departs, the
devil takes possession; all then is darkness, filth, and
deformity. If a God-man dying was a dreadful spectacle, mortal
sin is yet more dreadful; for Christ died but to atone for sin,
and sin can daily frustrate all his merits; he is crucified over
and over; his blood is trampled upon by ungrateful sinners.

{186}

  O detest at this moment all your sins. Lament from your heart
  the loss of God's grace; there is no loss so much to be
  lamented; it is the only loss which sorrow can repair.


"What advantage had you in those things at which you are now
blushing?"
  _Romans_ vi.

"Wo to that daring soul, which hoped that having retired from
you, she might still find something better."
  _St. Augustine_.


      _Twelfth Day_.--On Repentance.

1. "Repent, and believe the Gospel." Our Lord here joins faith
and repentance together, in order to teach us, that the rigours
of penance, and the profession of Christianity, are inseparable.
During his mortal life he was a penitent God, ever occupied in
expiating our sins, to appease the justice of his eternal Father.
Surely, we should follow his example. If the Holy of Holies
fasted, prayed, and wept, what should not be done by such vile
wretches as we are?

2. Sin must necessarily be punished, either by him who commits,
or by God, against whom it is committed. If sinners do not punish
themselves in time, the Divine Justice will punish them in
eternity. The flames of hell must punish what the waters of
penance have not effaced. Is it not, therefore, better to weep
for a few days, than to burn for eternity.

3. To be reconciled with God, it is not enough to prostrate
ourselves before a priest, cover our heads with ashes, and our
whole bodies with hair-cloth. If we have not a sincere sorrow for
our sins, if we do not entirely renounce our criminal
attachments, we are impostors, and not penitents. Prayers, alms,
fastings, and macerations of the flesh, are but the outside of
repentance; the hatred of sin is its very spirit and essence.

{187}

  Implore God's mercy for having hitherto led a life so opposite
  to the Gospel: and beg of him the grace to live for the future
  as the first Christians did, in the constant practice of
  penance.


"Unless you do penance, you shall all perish alike."
  _Luke_, xiii.

"To penitents, I say, To what purpose is it that you be humbled,
if with this you be not changed?"
  _St. Augustine._


   _Thirteenth Day._--On Delay of Conversion.

1. By deferring so long to give myself up to God, it should seem
as if I intended to escape out of his hand. Is it then a
misfortune to belong to him? To-morrow! to-morrow!--Why not
to-day? why not at this very moment? Will my chains be more
easily broken to-morrow? will my heart be less hard?--No,
certainly. Time, that weakens every thing else, adds new strength
to bad habits. By putting off the remedy, the complaint becomes
incurable.

2. What is it that prevents our obeying the voice that calls us
to repentance? What is it that terrifies us? That there is great
difficulty in changing our lives, must certainly be granted; but
what should not a Christian do, who adores a crucified God, and
who looks up to heaven? If we have any thing to fear, it should
be the abuse of God's graces.

{188}

3. There is time to come; but can I call it mine? Is it a
possession I am master of? God waits for me, it is true--the
scriptures tell me so--but still they do not tell me how long I
am to live. He that promised pardon to those who repent, has not
promised another day to those who continue in their vices.
Perhaps I shall have time, and perhaps I shall not. Must not I
have lost my senses, to trust my salvation to a mere
_perhaps?_


  Reflect now upon the time you have been deferring your
  conversion to God, and tremble at the sight of your danger.


"I said: now I have begun."
_Psalm_ lxxix.

"We cannot be too cautious, where eternity is at stake."
  _St. Gregory_.


    _Fourteenth Day,_--On Human Respect.

1. What will the world say? Let it say what it will: should the
talk of fools hinder you from being wise? But what will my
acquaintance say? They will say, that you fear God more than you
fear man; the greatest libertines will secretly admire you, and
acknowledge within themselves that you are doing right. But what
matters it, after all, what people may say of you, provided you
do your duty, and that God be satisfied?

{189}

2. O what cowardice, to blush at the gospel? To wear the livery
of a prince is held honourable: is it then shameful to wear that
of Jesus Christ? The lowest mechanics make open profession of the
trades they follow; and yet Christians, in the church, blush at
being thought Christians! The Son of God will deny before his
Father in heaven, the Christian that shall have denied him before
men.

3. What then? Is there any thing in Jesus that you should be
ashamed of? Is his name infamous? Is it a disgrace to follow his
maxims and example? You are not ashamed, perhaps, of being a
libertine, a drunkard, a blasphemer; you may probably even glory
in it; and yet you blush at being a good man. But let people say
what they will, the man that is most esteemed is he who serves
God with most fidelity, and who openly professes himself to be a
follower of Christ.


  Ask yourself seriously whether this phantom of the world doth
  not frighten you, and prevent your fulfilling the obligations
  which the Christian religion imposes.


"I do not blush at the gospel."
  _Romans_ i.

"Why should you fear or be ashamed,
when armed with the sign of the cross?"
  _St. Aug._


   _Fifteenth Day._--Diffidence in Ourselves.

1. We have nothing to fear so much as ourselves. Our own weakness
is more alarming than the united powers of hell. A thought, a
word, a single look is enough to overcome us. Angels have
rebelled, Adam hath fallen, Solomon hath bowed to idols, Peter
hath denied his Master. When cedars have yielded, how shall
osiers stand?

{190}

2. Our own heart is our most dangerous enemy; our senses and our
passions are always conspiring against us; we are vanquished
almost without a struggle. Let us then never be so weak or
foolish as to trust to ourselves. Many whom torments could not
shake, have wretchedly perished in a slight temptation: they were
victorious over tyrants, but vanquished by concupiscence.

3. There is no man, of how exemplary soever a conduct, that
should not tremble at the justice of God, because he cannot be
certain whether he be worthy of love or hatred. To the all-seeing
eye of Infinite Perfection, the very angels themselves shall not
appear without blemish. Sanctity may be lost in a single moment,
and the saint may be transformed into an odious reprobate. We
should all, therefore, cry out with St. Philip of Neri: "Watch
me, O Lord, this day, for abandoned to myself I shall surely
betray thee."


  Beware of the occasions of sin; the most dangerous are often
  what you are least afraid of.


"Let him who thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall."
  1 _Corinthians_ iv.

"Though you be in a place of safety,
do not on that account think yourself secure."
  _St. Bernard._

{191}

   _Sixteenth Day._--Use of Divine Grace.

1. Whatever grace we have, was dearly purchased: our Saviour gave
his blood for it. Wherefore to reject a pious thought, to resist
an holy inspiration, is, in fact, to trample on the merits of
Christ, and to frustrate, as much as we can, the ends he proposed
to himself in dying for us.

2. We are accountable to God, not only for the graces we have
received, but also for those which he intended to confer on us,
provided we ourselves had not put an obstacle to them. His sun
shines, but we shut our windows against it. Are we the less
indebted to him for its light?--No; for we may, if we please,
make use of it.

3. Many years, perhaps, has God been inviting us in vain;
soliciting, reprehending, and threatening us, to no manner of
purpose. But let us remember, that he is a _creditor_ who
will not thus be put off, and that the longer our debt is unpaid,
the more strictly will he require the interest. There is possibly
a measure of sins which may force him at last to abandon us.


  Thank the Almighty now for all his gifts and graces. Beg pardon
  for having been unfaithful to him, and resolve to correspond with
  docility, to all the suggestions of his grace for the future.


"From him to whom much hath been given,
much will be required."
  _Luke_, xii.

"Grace is followed by judgment."
  _St. Basil._

{192}

   _Seventeenth Day_.--Good Use of Time.

1. The loss of time is one of the greatest misfortunes in the
world. This life is so short! all its moments so precious! yet we
live as if it were never to end, or as if we had nothing to fear
hereafter.

2. Alas! if a damned soul had but one single moment of the time
we now squander away, what good use would he make of it! Every
instant of our life we may purchase a happy eternity. The
opportunity of enriching or amusing ourselves we never miss; but
the means of salvation appear to us indifferent.

3. The day that is best employed, is not always the one that has
most forwarded our temporal affairs, but that which has added
most to our merits, and which God has been best pleased with. Let
us always so regulate our time, that God and our salvation may be
our constant objects.


  Renew the resolution you have taken to serve God faithfully;
  and be firmly persuaded, that the time which is not employed
  for God, is no more than so much time lost for ever.


"God hath given to no person time for sinning."
  _Ecclesiastes_ xv.

"You have leisure to become a philosopher;
you have none to become a Christian."
  _St. Paul._


   _Eighteenth Day_.--Use of the Sacraments.

1. The sacraments are the channels of divine grace; through them
the merits of Christ abundantly flow into our souls. We must
therefore take care to approach them worthily; for otherwise his
merits will not avail us, nor will our salvation of course be
possible.

{193}

2. The abuse of the sacraments is an evil of the first magnitude.
They were instituted as the means of life; but, when perverted,
lead to eternal death. There is no medium; they must be either
our food or our poison. How dreadful then must it be to reflect,
that after so many confessions we should be so little improved,
that after repeated communions we should still follow the same
sinful course!

3. The unworthy communicant receives his own condemnation, and
becomes, as it were, incorporated with his own ruin. What answer
can he give when called to account for his baseness? How shall he
hope to escape, when arraigned for such daring profanations?


  Examine yourself carefully upon the use you have made of the
  sacraments, and receive them for the future, as if death were
  immediately approaching.


"Let a man prove himself."
  1 _Corinthians_.

"There are bad Christians, who are called by the name of
faithful, and who are not such; by whom the sacraments of Christ
are dishonoured and profaned."
  _St. Augustine._


     _Nineteenth Day_.--On the Mass.

1. A sacrifice is an exterior or visible offering made by a
lawful minister to God alone, in testimony of his supreme
dominion. Our absolute dependance on God, and the homage we owe
him, render sacrifice essential to religion. Hence, from the
beginning of the world it has been always offered: Abel, Noah,
Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, have sacrificed to the
Almighty; and a variety of sacrifices were prescribed in the
written law of Moses.

{194}

2. All these however, were only weak figures of the sacrifice of
Christ upon the cross; for sin was too great an evil, its guilt
was of too black a die to be ever removed by the blood of sheep
and oxen. No other atonement could possibly compensate for its
enormity, than the excruciating sufferings of a God; therefore
did he come. "In the head of the book it was written of him, that
he should do the will of his Father." By the one oblation of
himself he paid off all our debts, closed up the abyss of
separation, cancelled the hand-writing of sin that lay against
us, and the sanctified he perfected for ever.

3. Was not this enough? Most undoubtedly it was; nay, one drop of
his blood was fully adequate to all these purposes. Why then is
the same sacrifice daily renewed in the Mass? Why is he still
immolated upon our altars? Why is his body mystically drained of
his blood, by the separate consecrations of the two species?
{195}
Because his love for us would have it so; he would leave us a
standing memorial of his death; he would daily apply to our souls
the infinite merits thereof, just as he prays for us still,
though his prayer on the cross was already heard for us; he
would, as a priest for ever, according to the order of
Melchisedech, continue to the end of time the same unbloody
sacrifice; he was willing that his faithful on earth, united not
only in spirit, but in outward ties of religion, should ever have
this sacrifice before them, as the strongest bond of love, and
the most perfect act of adoration.


  Make a resolution to hear Mass every day, and to hear it with
  the devotion which so august a sacrifice requires. For this
  purpose go to the church as you would to Mount Calvary; adore
  Jesus Christ in his state of humiliation: pay him your homage
  with fervour at the foot of the altar. It is shameful in us and
  most displeasing to him, that he should be so much deserted in
  the midst of our churches, and that his court should be so
  empty, whilst earthly kings have their levees crowded.


"In every place there is a sacrifice,
and a pure victim is offered to my name."
  _Malic_. i.

"He will then be our victim indeed,
when we sacrifice ourselves to him."
  _St. Gregory_.


       _Twentieth Day_.--On Alms Deeds.

1. We minister to Christ when we relieve the poor. He abides in
the Eucharist to receive our adoration, and to become our
nourishment; he abides in the poor to excite our compassion, and
to be fed by us in our turn. Happy the man who gives alms to
Jesus! but wretched is he who refuses to assist him. Shall we
feed our dog, and let Christ famish with hunger!

{196}

2. What we give to the great ones of the earth may, in a great
measure, be considered as forfeited: but what we present to God
is always attended with advantage. He gives it back with
interest. He repays with liberality the crumbs that are given for
his sake; his rewards are laid up even for _a cup of cold
water_. Play, luxury, and debauch, have ruined innumerable
families, but alms have impoverished no one.

3. Men at the day of judgment shall be accountable for their
alms; but what answer can the unfeeling rich ones make when the
poor shall accuse them, when Jesus Christ himself shall reproach
them with their insensibility? "Go, ye accursed, into eternal
fire: I was hungry, and you gave me not to eat; I was naked, and
you did not clothe me," &c. A heart that is hard to the poor, is
the heart of a reprobate; but on the contrary, a soul that is
truly charitable, is a soul predestined. What can our Judge say
against us, when he shall see our clothes upon himself, when he
shall see our bread and our money in his own hands? We shall
approach his awful tribunal with confidence, provided the poor be
our advocates.


  Consider seriously how you behave to the poor; whether you
  treat them as members of Jesus Christ, by doing them all the
  good in your power.


"He gives at interest to the Lord,
who has pity on the poor."
  _Proverbs_ xix.

"Give unto all, lest he whom you refuse should be Jesus Christ."
  _St. Augustine_.

{197}

     _Twenty-first Day_--On Bad Example.

1. Bad example has damned more souls than the preaching and good
example of all the saints together have been the means of saving.

2. Were the gates of hell to be laid open, scarcely would any one
be found that would not say, _it is such or such-a-one that has
damned me_. O what a reproach! We are commanded to love our
enemies: why then should we destroy souls which have never done
us an injury? A man who has been unfortunate enough to ruin souls
redeemed by the blood of a God, hath much reason to fear for his
salvation. What can we reasonably hope from Jesus Christ, after
having torn from him what he hath so dearly purchased? O fathers
and mothers, who do not live as Christians ought to live, it were
far better for your children that they had never been born! You
have given them life only to put them to death; that dreadful
death which is eternal! When they shall require of you the heaven
they have lost, what will you he able to answer them?

3. Let us clothe ourselves with Jesus Christ, according to the
words of the apostle; let his conduct, his virtue, and his spirit
shine forth in us, so that _he_ may be remembered when we
are seen. We contribute not less to our neighbour's salvation by
an edifying life, than we do to his damnation by a scandalous
one.


  Be very careful to do nothing that may scandalize your
  neighbour; and humbly beg pardon of God for the sins you have
  occasioned.

{198}

"Wo be to the man by whom scandal cometh."
  _St. Matt_. xviii.

"The scandalous sinner must answer for the crimes which his bad
example hath caused to be committed."
  _Salvian_.


   _Twenty-second Day_.--On Mortification.

1. We are not Christians merely to be rich and to live at our
ease. It was not necessary to institute Christianity for that
purpose: the world might have been left as it was, under the
empire of passion and opinion. The life of a Christian is a
crucified life: unless the cross be embraced, faith must be
renounced.

2. What doth the gospel say? "Blessed are those who weep: wo be
to you, O rich, who have your consolation in this world!" Such is
the language of the Holy Ghost. But it is now looked on as
nonsense to believe that felicity consists in tears, and that the
rich are unhappy.

3. The Son of God was to die on the cross, that he might take
possession of his glory; the saints have arrived at heaven by the
path of sufferings. Shall we then imagine that what the Son of
God and the saints have so dearly purchased, shall be given to us
for nothing? No; the cross is the distinctive mark and portion of
the elect: a soul which suffers nothing, and is resolved to
suffer nothing, bears the strongest character of a reprobate. We
must of necessity suffer in this world or in the next.

  Adore Christ crucified, and beg of him the grace to participate
  now in his suffering life, that you may be one day a partaker in
  his life of glory.

{199}

"Whoever doth not carry his cross is not worthy of me."
  _Luke_, xiv.

"What a shame to be a delicate member
of a head crowned with thorns."
  _St. Bernard._


  _Twenty-third Day_.--On Conformity to the Will of God.

1. The greatest happiness of a rational creature is, to will that
which his Creator willeth. It is in this, precisely, that real
sanctity consists. The saints are saints only because their will
corresponded with the will of God. Whatever virtue we may
possess, if we have not that of conformity to the divine will, we
are not truly virtuous.

2. A soul that is not satisfied with the will of God, seems to
doubt, in some measure, of his authority. To desire that what he
ordains and permits in this world should go on otherwise than it
does, is to desire that God should not be master. Every thing
that happens to us, happens by his order; and is it not just to
acquiesce in whatever is ordained by infinite wisdom?

3. All things but sin fall out by God's appointment. Though his
arm be raised to strike, we are sure that his hand is conducted
by his heart. What have we to fear from a heart that loves us? We
will then desire nothing but what he pleases; we will not
complain of losses, sickness, trouble, &c. The name and the
nature of these things are changed as they pass through the hands
of God. What the world calls misfortunes, affliction, dishonour,
is an advantage, a grace, and a favour from heaven, when
considered in the order of providence.

{200}

  Renounce your own will, and beg of God that his maybe
  accomplished in you.


"Be it so, Father, because it is thy will."
  _Matthew_ xi.

"He is pleasing to God,
to whom God is pleasing."
  _St. Augustine._


  _Twenty-fourth Day_.--Confidence in God.

1. God is the greatest parent of mankind; our Lord Jesus Christ
has taught us to call him _Father_. Not a hair can even drop
from our heads without his knowledge. His providence reaches from
end to end, disposing all things sweetly. What madness,
therefore, to doubt of his protection, or to be slow in trusting
ourself to his guidance!

2. The _insects_ are an object of his care; how much more we
who are created to his image, and redeemed by the blood of his
only-begotten Son! If God feed the infidels, who know him not; if
he heaps favours on the impious, by whom he is blasphemed, what
will he not do for Christians who honour and love him?

3. Our affairs are much better off when in his hands, than they
can be in our own: let us therefore leave them all at his
disposal. He is at the same time our Father and our Creator. The
tenderness he has for his children obliges him to take care of
them. He has promised us his protection; he will then be as good
as his word. Sooner shall the heavens and the earth he destroyed,
than that man should perish, who places his confidence in God.

{201}

  Examine your heart, and see whether your confidence be worthy
  of the goodness of God, and the merits of Jesus Christ.


"Thou art my God: my lot is in thy hands."
  _Psalm_ xxx.

"Throw yourself upon him,
he will not withdraw to let you fall."
  _St. Augustine._


  _Twenty-fifth Day._--On the Love of God.

1. God has loved us to such a degree, as to give us his only Son:
had he any thing better he would have given it us. Is it not
buying our love too dearly, to purchase it at so dear a rate? A
trifling bounty from a fellow-creature is entitled to our love;
why, then, shall we not love a bounty that is infinite? Why doth
its being infinite render it less amiable?

2. God has strictly enjoined me to love him. Is a commandment
rigorous, which orders us to love what is infinitely worthy of
our affections? He commands us to love him with all our hearts.
Is a heart so small as mine, too much for a God so great? But in
saying _all_, he admits of no exception. Whatever share I
give him, if I give him not all, I give him nothing.

{202}

3. If eternity could have an end, the torments of the damned in
hell, even to the day of judgment, would not be too much to
obtain this heavenly love. There is not one of these miserable
souls that would not think itself happy, provided that, after
ages of sufferings, it could love that infinite beauty. We can
love God if we please: every moment invites us to it. Not to do
so while it can be done, is a monstrous insensibility.


  Disclaim every love but that of God alone, and endeavour to
  love him above all things.


"If I have not charity, I am nothing."
  1 _Corinthians_ xiii.


  _Twenty-sixth Day_.--Love of Jesus Christ.

1. Nothing was ever purchased at so dear a rate as my soul. A
divine life was given to redeem it. I deserved hell: justice
cried out for punishment; but Christ would listen only to the
emotions of his heart: it pleaded in my behalf, and I obtained
forgiveness. If I return him not life for life, the least I can
do is to return him love for love.

2. The dog that I feed, watches, caresses, and attends me: Jesus
has given his blood for me, and continues to give me himself; yet
I am still insensible. Learn, then, ungrateful soul! learn, I
say, thy duty from a brute! thy dog is thy teacher and thy judge.
If his example reform not thy heart, thou art more brutal than
he.

{203}

3. We can feel for our friends; we are not insensible of the good
they do us; we pique ourselves upon gratitude. Shall we then be
ungrateful only to Christ? Shall he alone find us hard-hearted?
Had we ever a friend that sacrificed himself for us?


  Beg the love of Jesus from Jesus himself. Without his grace we
  shall never be able to love him.


"If any one love not the Lord Jesus,
let him be accursed."
  1 _Corinthians_ vi.

"If I belong to him entirely for having created me, what shall I
add for having been redeemed, and redeemed in so excellent a
manner?"
  _St. Bernard._


  _Twenty-seventh Day_.--Love of our Neighbour.

1. If we love not our neighbour, we cannot love God. Whatever
good we do, is to no purpose, if we do not love our brethren.
Even martyrdom itself will not avail us, without charity.

2. "This is my commandment," said Jesus, "that you love one
another, as I have loved you." Had mankind nothing else than
Christ's love to endear them, they are objects of esteem for that
very reason. Since our Saviour has loved them, shall we refuse to
do so?

3. Do we love all men as Christ has loved them? Do we thirst for
their salvation as he did? Do we do by them as we would be done
by?


  Excite yourself to love those whom our Lord Jesus Christ has
  loved so tenderly: firmly purpose to promote their salvation,
  and never to do what may offend against charity.

{204}

"He that loveth his neighbour hath fulfilled the law."
  _Romans_ xiii.

"By charity alone, the children of God are
distinguished from the children of Satan."
  _St. Augustine._


  _Twenty-eighth Day._--Love of our Enemies.

1. So essential is charity to the Christian religion, that we are
obliged to love even our enemies; Christ hath given the
commandment, and set the example. God orders it, and shall we
find it hard to obey? A God forgives his very executioners, and
shall we refuse to pardon a brother?

2. "He that will not forgive, shall not be forgiven." God will
not pardon us, but on the condition that we pardon others. If we
seek revenge, we call down God's anger upon us. We must either
love our enemies, or hate ourselves.

3. It should seem that two Christians who hate each other, are
not really professors of the same religion; for how can they
approach the same altar, eat the same food, believe the same
heaven, and hope to be together eternally? Mutual hatred is
allowed but to devils: it belongs to them alone. There is not a
more formal sign of reprobation, than that of refusing to pardon
an enemy; and a soul in such a disposition may be looked on as
marked for hell.


  Examine your heart at the sight of the crucifix; and if you
  feel a hatred for any person, take sentiments of charity from
  the wounds of Jesus.

{205}

"He that hates his brother is a murderer."
1 _John_, iii. 15.

"You a Christian, and yet desire to be revenged!
But Christ hath not yet taken vengeance."
  _St. Augustine._


   _Twenty-ninth Day_.--Imitation of Christ.

1. The Son of God, when he united his divinity to our human
nature, became the model of Christians. He is the head of the
predestined; we are therefore bound to resemble him.

2. The manners of the world are carefully studied; but the life
of Jesus Christ is hardly thought upon. Courtiers form themselves
upon their prince; philosophers have been imitated even in their
faults. Did we ever seriously strive to imitate Jesus? Have we
taken any pains to follow his example, or to copy after the
virtues of his holy life?

3. What shall we say for ourselves at the awful tribunal of
Divine Justice, when we shall be compared to our model; when the
life of Jesus shall be opposed to our life; his humility to our
pride; his wounds to our delicacy; his sweetness to our anger and
impatience, &c.? Ah! what a monster is a Christian without
Christianity! baptized, and a slave of the devil! under the
banners of the cross, yet a follower of the flesh and the world!
We must then renounce our baptism, or conform to the life of our
Saviour.

{206}

  See whether you bear any resemblance to the Son of God, and
  whether you may be truly considered as a disciple of a
  crucified Jesus.


"Master, I will follow thee wheresoever thou goest."
  _Matthew_ viii.

"Without cause am I a Christian,
if I follow not Christ."
  _St. Bernard._


  _Thirtieth Day_.--On Fervour in the Service of God.

1. Let us have as much zeal for God as he has for us. He acts
exteriorly, but for the perfection of our souls. All the desires
of his heart, all the cares of his providence, all the tenderness
of his mercy, are referred to this. O what a subject of confusion
for tepid souls!

2. Were we to judge of God by our own indifference, it might be
said that he does not deserve our services, and that his rewards
are very trifling. What idea can be had of a master whose
servants attend him carelessly, and without the smallest
affection? We dishonour God, we cry down his services, as often
as we perform negligently what he requires of us. Wo be to the
man who does the work of God without attention!

{207}

3. An action done for God, how trifling soever it may be, is of
far greater value than the most renowned exploits of heroes. If
we pique ourselves upon so much courage in labouring for vanity,
what should be done when we are employed for eternity? What! the
servants of the devil spare no pains; they do not complain of
what they go through; they are ever indefatigable. Is Jesus
Christ then less considerable than the devil? Is paradise less
valuable than hell? Hell then shall be, as it were, our
instructor: we are to love God as much as the damned hate him; we
are to serve God as much as the world serves the devil. Is this
too much?


  Examine your conduct with respect to the service of God;
  consider the actions in which you are most remiss, and excite
  yourself to perform them henceforth with a fervour worthy of
  your master.


"Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord."
  _Romans_.

"Let the ardour you formerly had for the world be now entertained
for him that created it."
  _St Augustine._


  _Thirty-first Day._--On Devotion to the Mother of God.

1. A more pure, more excellent, or more amiable being than this
glorious Virgin, was never yet created. God having from all
eternity destined her to be the mother of his Son, it was proper
she should be embellished with every created excellence, and that
her dignity and influence in heaven should far surpass the
dignity and influence of all the other saints. Most justly then
is she entitled to our veneration, respect, and confidence.

{208}

2. Let us put ourselves under her protection: let us recommend
ourselves to her prayers. How great soever our wickedness, or how
numerous soever our faults may have been, let us always have
recourse to her, and hope, through her prayers, for the grace of
our conversion. Her charity is so great, her interest is so
powerful, that she must always plead successfully for the
repenting sinner.

3. But let us never forget, that to honour her properly, is to
imitate her virtues; that to persevere in sin, upon the hopes of
her future intercession, is equally absurd, impious, and
detestable. Her hatred of this error should be always before our
eyes. Her purity, her mildness, her patience, should be ever
present to us.

"Hail, full of grace."
  _Luke_, i.

"O name! under which no one should despair."
  _St. Augustine._


             Concluding Reflection.

1. As Christians, it would be very profitable for us to reflect,
every morning, that we have on that day a God to glorify, a
Saviour to imitate, our souls to save, our bodies to mortify,
virtues to acquire, sins to satisfy for, heaven to seek after,
hell to fly, eternity to meditate on, time to improve,
temptations to overcome, the devil to resist, our neighbour to
edify, our passions to subdue, the world to guard against, and
perhaps death and judgment to undergo. Reflect seriously on all
these important truths, and they will not only incite you to
begin the day well, but also, in the course thereof, to make the
affair of your eternal salvation your principal study.

{209}

2. As it is also a duty of the last consequence to conclude the
day properly, nothing can prove a more powerful incitement
thereto, than the serious consideration of the many spiritual and
temporal blessings which God hath bestowed on you; the various
evils from which his providence hath hitherto preserved you; and
the absolute uncertainty whether you shall ever unclose your eyes
to behold the next morning. Thousands who had as good a right to
expect it as you, were nevertheless disappointed. The very bed on
which you lie is a _memento mori_, or kind of sepulchre; and
sleep, the image of death. What unaccountable rashness then must
it be, for a sinner to compose himself to sleep in a state of
mortal sin, without first endeavouring to appease the wrath of
God by an act of contrition, or some other spiritual exercise of
piety and devotion; since that very night, perhaps, his soul may
be required of him!

3. Let us then guard against this danger, by a faithful discharge
of every Christian duty; let us frequently exclaim, with the
prophet: "Enlighten mine eyes, O Lord, that I may never sleep in
death, lest the enemy at any time may say, I have
_prevailed_ against him."

"He that desires to make any progress in the service of God, must
begin every day with fresh ardour; he must, as much as possible,
keep himself in the presence of God, and in all his actions, have
no other object in view but that of promoting the divine honour."
  _St. C. Borromeus._

{210}

       Mentations On The Apostles' Creed,

  _Which may be used with great spiritual profit by Religious
  Societies, or Private Families, assembled together in common
  prayer at night, or at any other time most convenient; on
  Sundays, Holidays, &c_.


                   The Method.

  Thirteen Paters and Aves are annexed to these meditations, in
  honor of Jesus Christ and his twelve apostles. The meditations
  to be read by the head of the family or community, to which the
  assistants should hearken with the most devout attention. The
  prayers to be recited partly by the head, and partly by the
  assistants.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity,
now and for evermore. Amen.

V. Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips,

R. And my tongue shall declare thy praise.

V. O God, incline unto mine aid.

R. O Lord, make haste to help me.

V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

R. As it was in the beginning, &c. Amen.

{211}

                 Let Us Pray.

Direct, O Lord, we beseech thee, our actions by thy holy
inspirations, and carry them on by thy gracious assistance, that
every prayer and work of ours may always begin from thee, and may
by thee be happily ended, through Christ our Lord. Amen.


           Let us recite the Lord's Prayer.

Our Father, &c. Give us this day, &c.

        Let us recite the Angelical Salutation.

Hail Mary, &c. Holy Mary, &c.

      Let us recite and devoutly meditate on
      the different articles of the Creed.


                 First Article.

"_I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth._"--Let us attentively consider, in this first article
of our creed, the infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, which our
almighty and sovereign Lord God has displayed in the creation of
the heavens and of the earth, and of all things visible and
invisible therein contained. He drew us out of the abyss of
nothing, and made all things for our use and service. He gave us
rational and immortal souls, stamped with his own image and
likeness, and capable of knowing, loving, and serving him on
earth, and of enjoying him for all eternity in the kingdom of
heaven. This is the noble, the blessed, and the glorious end for
which he has vouchsafed to create us; and should it not be our
chief study and care to answer this happy end, by dedicating
ourselves to him for time and eternity, and by employing all our
senses, and all the faculties of our souls, in his love and
service, and for his greater honour and glory? With this
intention let us say: "Our Father," &c. "Give us this day," &c.
"Hail Mary," &c. "Holy Mary," &c.

{212}

                 Second Article.

"_And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord._"--Let us now
meditate on the great benefit of our redemption, and the
boundless mercy of the only-begotten and eternal Son of God; who,
when four thousand years had elapsed after the creation and fall
of our first parents from their original innocence, out of pure
love and compassion, came down from heaven, to reconcile us to
his eternal Father, and to purchase mercy, grace, and salvation
for us, by the effusion of the last drop of his precious blood.
Thus he became our Jesus, our Christ, our Redeemer, our Saviour,
our High Priest, our Mediator, our King, our Lord, and our
Sovereign Master. He claims and challenges us, therefore, as his
sole right and property. We belong to him by every title that
dominion or jurisdiction can confer. We are his by creation, his
by preservation, his by the title of his all-ruling providence.
We are his in a very special and particular manner, by virtue of
our redemption. As Christians we derive our name from him, and
are his members and temples, dedicated and consecrated to him by
the solemn vows and covenant of our baptism.

{213}

Let us then offer all our thoughts, words, and actions, to his
honour and glory, and let us employ our whole lives in loving and
serving him faithfully; saying, for this end, the prayers which
himself and his church have taught us: "Our Father," &c. "Hail
Mary," &c.


                Third Article.

"_Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin
Mary._"--We are now to meditate on the wonderful mystery of
the incarnation and temporal nativity of the Son of God. When the
fulness of time appointed for the redemption of mankind was come,
the second Person of the blessed Trinity assumed our flesh in the
womb of his blessed Mother; that the divine and human nature
being thus united in his person, he might be capable of
satisfying divine justice for the injury which God had received
by sin. He became man for our salvation, not in the _ordinary
way_, but after _a supernatural and incomprehensible
manner_, by the operation of the Holy Ghost. But although the
incarnation, considered particularly as a work of divine mercy,
goodness and love, be particularly attributed to the Holy Ghost,
and although the three Persons of the blessed Trinity,
essentially possessing the same undivided powers, have equally
concurred therein, yet this wonderful work was effected only by
the second Person: his sacred body was formed of the most pure
blood of his Virgin Mother, without the least violation of her
virginal integrity, and a most perfect soul was created to
animate his body.
{214}
Being thus miraculously conceived, he was also, after the space
of nine months, miraculously born in a stable at Bethlehem, under
the reign of Augustus Cæsar. As man, being at the same time true
God, he subjected himself to all our infirmities and miseries,
sin only excepted, of which he was incapable. At so early a
period as at his very first entrance into the world, he was
pleased to suffer for us, and to give us, in his tender infancy,
the most perfect example of poverty, humility, and mortification;
that he might thereby manifest to us the infinite riches of his
mercy and goodness, and teach us to despise the sinful vanities
of the world. He discovered himself to the shepherds by a choir
of angels from heaven, to shew that he came to be the Saviour of
the Jews. He manifested himself also to the Eastern Magi by a
star from heaven, to shew that he was likewise come to be the
Saviour of the Gentiles. He continued to live in a poor, private,
and retired manner, till he was thirty years of age, when he
began to preach the gospel, to cast out devils, to cure the dumb,
the deaf, the lame, and blind, and to work the most stupendous
miracles, in favour of a people the most ungrateful on the face
of the earth.
{215}
Let us not imitate them; let us rather embrace our divine
Redeemer with all the affections of our souls, and ever retain a
most grateful sense of the innumerable benefits he has conferred
on us; devoutly saying: "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.


                 Fourth Article.

"_Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and
buried._"--Let us here meditate on the dolorous mysteries of
our dear Redeemer's passion, crucifixion, death and burial. To
show the greatness of his love for us, and the plenteous
redemption which he brought us, he was pleased to suffer every
kind of torment with which human nature could be afflicted. "What
was sufficient for our salvation," says St. Bernard, "was not
sufficient for his charity." When he could have saved us with a
single drop of his blood, he redeemed us with a deluge thereof,
after a painful life of thirty-three years. His passion began in
the garden of Gethsemani, at the foot of Mount Olivet, near
Jerusalem, and ended only on Mount Calvary; Tiberius being then
emperor of Rome, and Pontius Pilate governor, or president, of
Judea. He suffered in his soul, and in his body, in his senses,
and in all his members, from the sole of his foot, to the crown
of his head. He was buffet ted and spit upon; he was mocked and
insulted; he was scourged; he was crowned with thorns; and at
length his hands and feet were pierced and fastened with gross
nails to an ignominious cross; and after hanging alive thereon,
between two thieves, in the most excruciating pain, for the space
of three long hours, he expired, and gave up his blessed soul
into the hands of his eternal Father.
{216}
After his death, his sacred body being taken off the cross on
Good-Friday, in the afternoon, and being embalmed, according to
the custom of the Jews, by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, it
was wrapped up in linen cloth, and laid in a new monument, hewn
out of a rock, near Mount Calvary. O let us not then repay the
boundless love of our crucified Redeemer with sin and
ingratitude, but let us rather make the best return we are able,
of love and gratitude to him, who suffered so much for our sake;
devoutly saying, "Our Father," &c. "Hail, Mary," &c.


                  Fifth Article.

"_He descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the
dead_."--Here let us meditate how our blessed Saviour's soul,
when separated from his body, descended into hell, or the dreary
prison, where the souls of the holy patriarchs and saints of the
Old Testament were detained, until he had paid the price of their
redemption, and opened for them the gates of heaven, which had
remained shut against mankind from the fall [of] Adam until that
time.
{217}
We may judge how the presence and sight of their so long
wished-for Redeemer turned their gloomy prison into a paradise of
delights, and occasioned unspeakable joy to the holy souls to
whom he came to preach the gospel of redemption, release from
their tedious captivity, and carry up with him to heaven at his
ascension, as the first fruits of his victorious triumph over sin
and death. Having comforted them by these happy tidings, his
blessed soul, after remaining part of three days subject to the
laws of death, returned from this prison to the sepulchre, and
being re-united to his body, he arose early on the morning of the
third day from the bowels of the earth, by his own divine power,
and was the first who from death rose to a glorious and immortal
life. His resurrection is a perfect model for us to copy after.
Let us endeavour to imitate it by a spiritual resurrection from
the death of sin, to a new life of grace, so as to continue for
ever to live with him, and to return no more to the death of
mortal sin. For this end, let us implore his divine assistance;
saying with devotion, "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.


                  Sixth Article.

"_He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of
God, the Father Almighty._"--Let us here meditate how our
divine Redeemer, after accomplishing the great work of our
redemption, ascended triumphantly from the top of Mount Olivet
into the kingdom of heaven, on the fortieth day after his
glorious resurrection, in the presence of his apostles and
disciples, till a cloud at length interposed and took him out of
their sight.
{218}
He then withdrew his visible presence from the world; raised
human nature above the choirs of saints and angels, to the
highest seat in the kingdom of heaven, where, in full possession
of the glory of his eternal Father, he pleads for us with the
powerful eloquence of his sacred wounds, which he incessantly
represent to him, in quality of our High Priest, Mediator, and
Advocate. O what a comfortable reflection, to think that we have
such an affectionate friend in the court of heaven! O what
encouragement to raise our hopes! what inducement to follow him
with our hearts, and ascend after him in spirit and affection!
For this end let us beseech him to break the chains of our sins,
and the fetters of our passions, which so unhappily tie down our
affections to the earth; devoutly saying, "Our Father," &c. "Hail
Mary," &c.


                 Seventh Article.

"_From whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead_." Here let us meditate on our blessed Redeemer's return
at the end of the world, with great pomp and majesty, in quality
of Sovereign Judge of the living and the dead.
{219}
As soon as the last trumpet shall sound, and the angel
repeat these words in the four corners of the earth: "Arise ye
dead, and come to judgment!" the whole race of mankind, both the
good and the wicked, are to appear before his awful tribunal, in
sight of Mount Calvary, in order to give a strict account of all
their thoughts, words, and actions; for, besides the particular
judgment which is passed on every soul immediately after death,
the justice of God requires that a general judgment should also
take place, in order that the children of Adam should be
assembled together, and receive their sentence; either of eternal
salvation or eternal reprobation. O let us make a timely
provision for this woful day, in order that we may then meet with
a favourable judgment, and be entitled to receive the happy
sentence of the elect; saying for this end, "Our Father," &c.
"Hail Mary," &c.


                  Eighth Article.

_"I believe in the Holy Ghost._"--Let us now meditate on the
great work of our sanctification, which is particularly
attributed to the Holy Ghost, the third person of the ever
blessed Trinity; because he is the love of the Father and the
Son, and because it is from God's love to us that all sanctity,
all grace, all justification and virtue flow. For which reason
the apostle says, "the charity of God is poured into our hearts
by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us." We first receive the Holy
Ghost, and are made his living temples at the font of baptism,
and afterwards we receive him in a more perfect manner in the
sacrament of confirmation, &c.
{220}
O what a happiness it is to possess this divine and heavenly
guest in our souls! and how solicitous should we be to invite him
into our hearts, to engage him to stay with us, and to make our
souls his dwelling-place for time and eternity! Let us devoutly
implore this greatest of blessings; saying, "Our Father," &c.
"Hail Mary," &c.


                  Ninth Article.

"_The holy Catholic Church; the Communion of Saints_."--We
are now to meditate on the infinite goodness and mercy of God,
who, by a special grace, has vouchsafed to call us to the light
of his true and saving faith, and to include us within the pale
and bosom of his One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, in
preference to so many thousands in different parts of the world,
left in ignorance, or buried in the darkness of error and
infidelity. This grace of our vocation is so signal a blessing,
that it calls upon us for our most grateful acknowledgments, and
will render us more culpable at the last day than pagans or
infidels, if, instead of living up to our holy profession, we
dishonour it by the immorality of our lives.
{221}
On the contrary, if we square our actions according to our
belief; if we show the purity of our religion by the purity of
our morals, and live as becomes worthy members of the Catholic
Church, we shall assuredly be made partakers of all spiritual
blessings and treasures thereof, and benefit by all the prayers,
sacrifices, and good works, which are wrought therein by our
fellow-members; for as there subsists a common union between all
the parts of the human body, there subsists, in like manner, a
common or general union in spirituals between all the parts of
Christ's mystical body, the holy Catholic Church. O what an
inestimable blessing then must it be, to live and die in the
communion of his church! and, on the contrary, what a grievous
loss and misfortune to be cut off therefrom by excommunication,
like rotten and dead members separated from a natural body by
amputation! Let us beware of incurring the like misfortune, and
beseech the Almighty to grant us grace to be always obedient
hearers of the pastors of his church, those spiritual guides to
whom he has committed the care of our souls; saying for this end,
"Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.


                  Tenth Article.

"_The Forgiveness of Sins_."--Here let us also meditate on a
second signal advantage which may be obtained within the pale of
the holy Catholic Church. Besides the mutual communication in
spirituals, and participation in good works, that subsists
between all the parts of the church in their three different
states, viz. the saints in heaven, the souls in purgatory, and
the true believers on earth, who compose the church triumphant,
sufferant, and militant; the apostles also teach us, in this
article of their creed, that there is a power left by Jesus
Christ to his church, to forgive the sins of such as truly
repent, and properly apply for absolution.
{222}
Original sin has been already remitted by the sacrament of
baptism, and the actual sins committed after baptism are pardoned
in the sacrament of penance, when duly administered by the
pastors of the church, and received with the proper dispositions
on the part of the repenting sinner. Let us therefore beseech the
Father of mercies to grant us these dispositions; saying, "Our
Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.


                Eleventh Article.

"_The Resurrection of the Flesh_."--Let us here meditate on
a third signal privilege reserved in the next life for the living
members of the holy Catholic Church. On the last day there will
be a general resurrection of the dead; and the whole human race,
which at the fall of our first parents had been sentenced to
return to their original dust, shall arise again to receive their
final and irrevocable doom. As soon as the angel, by the sound of
his trumpet, proclaims the awful summons, "Arise ye dead, and
come to judgment!" the bodies of all the children of Adam,
re-animated by their respective souls, shall instantaneously, in
the "twinkling of an eye," issue forth out of their several
graves and sepulchres, never more to be separated for an endless
eternity.
{223}
But, alas! how very different will be the manner of the
resurrection of the reprobate from that of the elect! for whereas
the bodies of the former shall arise in a condition suitable to
their deserts, that is, foul, hideous, heavy, inactive, and only
fit to be the fuel of everlasting flames, (immortal indeed they
shall be, but to no other end than to endure immortal torments,)
so those of the latter shall arise glorious, beautiful, immortal,
and impassible, brighter than the stars, and more resplendent
than the sun. This glorious state of immortality is infallibly
reserved for the bodies of such Christians as in this life have
been as it were consecrated by receiving the holy sacraments, and
particularly the Eucharist; since Christ himself expressly
declares, "He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day." O let us
then frequently approach this heavenly banquet, with the proper
dispositions, that thereby our bodies and souls being preserved
pure from the corruption of sin, may both arise together at the
last day to a happy immortality. That this may be our happy lot,
let us with the most fervent devotion, say, "Our Father," &c.
"Hail Mary," &c.

{224}

                 Twelfth Article.

"_Life everlasting_."--This is the fourth and
final blessing attainable within the pale of the
holy Catholic Church, and reserved for the
children of light in the next world. It is the
last end of man, the ultimate reward that
awaits true faith, animated by charity and
good works, and it essentially consists in the
clear vision and fruition of God. O let us
lead such lives here on earth, that we may
hereafter live with Jesus Christ in the glory of his eternal
Father, for ever and ever: and that this may be our happy case,
let us devoutly say, "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.


                The Salve Regina.

  Hail, happy Queen! thou mercy's parent hail!
  Life, hope, and comfort of this earthly vale;
  To thee we eve's wretched children cry;
  In sighs and tears to thee we suppliants fly.
  Rise, glorious advocate, exert thy love,
  And let our vows thine eyes of pity move.
  O sweet, O pious maid! for us obtain--
  For us who long have in our exile lain--
  To see thy Jesus, and with him to reign.

V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God,

R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

V. Pray for us, O ye holy apostles, and all ye saints of God,

R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

{225}


                   Let Us Pray.

We beseech thee, O Lord, that by the intercession of the blessed
and glorious Virgin Mary, of thy holy apostles, and of all thy
saints, thou wouldst vouchsafe to protect and defend us from the
snares of the enemy, and conduct us unto life everlasting. Amen.


                An Universal Prayer.
        For All Things Necessary To Salvation.

O my God, I believe in thee; do thou strengthen my faith. All my
hopes are in thee; do thou secure them. I love thee with my whole
heart; teach me to love thee daily more and more. I am sorry that
I have offended thee; do thou increase my sorrow.

I adore thee as my first beginning. I aspire after thee as my
last end. I give thee thanks as my constant benefactor. I call
upon thee as my sovereign protector.

Vouchsafe, O my God, to conduct me by thy wisdom, to restrain me
by thy justice, to comfort me by thy mercy, to defend me by thy
power.

To thee I desire to consecrate all my thoughts, words, actions,
and sufferings; that henceforward I may think of thee, speak of
thee, willingly refer all my actions to thy greater glory, and
suffer willingly whatever thou shalt appoint.

{226}

Lord, I desire that in all things thy will may be done, because
it is thy will and in the manner thou willest.

I beg of thee to enlighten my understanding, to inflame my will,
to purify my body, and to sanctify my soul.

Give me strength, O my God, to expiate my offences, to overcome
my temptations, to subdue my passions, and to acquire the virtues
proper for my state.

Fill my heart with a tender affection for thy goodness, a hatred
for my faults, a love for my neighbour, and a contempt for the
world.

Let me always remember to be submissive to my superiors,
condescending to my inferiors, faithful to my friends, and
charitable to my enemies.

Assist me to overcome sensuality by mortification, avarice by
alms-deeds, anger by meekness, and tepidity by devotion.

O my God, make me prudent in my undertakings, courageous in
dangers, patient in afflictions, and humble in prosperity.

Grant that I may ever be attentive at my prayers, temperate at my
meals, diligent in my employments, and constant in my
resolutions.

Let my conscience be ever upright and pure, my exterior modest,
my conversation edifying, and my comportment regular.

{227}

Assist me, that I may continually labour to overcome nature, to
correspond with thy grace, to keep thy commandments, and to work
out my salvation.

Discover to me, O my God, the nothingness of this world, the
greatness of heaven, the shortness of time, and the length of
eternity.

Grant that I may prepare for death; that I may fear thy
judgments; that I may escape hell, and in the end obtain heaven,
through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.


     A Prayer For The Choice Of A State Of Life.

O eternal God, who art the light of the world, and for whose
glory the whole creation is ordained, to thee I submit myself,
and my whole life; and that I may live to thy glory, I beseech
thee, in thy mercy, to direct me in the choice of a state of
life; that, having thee for my guide, I may embrace that course
which may be most pleasing to thee, and most proper for me to
work out my salvation.

O Queen of heaven, and mother of Jesus, be a mother to me, and
obtain for me of thy divine Son, that I may hear his call, and
know his will, and have grace readily to put it into execution.
Amen.


           A Prayer For A Pregnant Woman.

O Lord God Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, who hath made
us out of nothing, and redeemed us by the precious blood of thine
only Son, look down upon thy poor handmaid here prostrate before
thee, humbly imploring thy mercy, and begging thy blessing for
herself and her child, which thou hast given her to conceive.
{228}
Preserve, I beseech thee, the work of thy hands, and defend both
me and the tender fruit of my womb, from all perils and evils;
grant me, in due time a happy delivery, and bring my child safe
to the font of baptism, that it may there be happily dedicated to
thee, to love and serve thee for ever. But, O my God, I have too
much reason to fear, lest my great and manifold sins should
hinder thee from hearing my prayers, and draw down thy judgment
upon me and mine, instead of thy mercies which I sue for; and
therefore I am sensible the first thing I ought to do is, to
repent from the bottom of my heart for all my offences, humbly
confess them, and continually cry to thee for mercy. I detest,
then, all my sins with my whole heart, and desire to lay them all
down here at thy feet, to be effaced and destroyed for ever. I
renounce and abhor them with my whole soul, because they are
infinitely odious to thee, and wish that I could expiate them
with tears of blood. I humbly beg thy pardon for them, and am
sorry from the bottom of my heart that I ever committed them. I
here offer myself to make what satisfaction I am able for them,
and most willingly accept whatever pains I may suffer in
childbearing, and offer them up to thee now beforehand for my
sins, firmly resolving by thy grace never wilfully to offend thee
more.
{229}
Behold here my poor heart, O Lord, and if it be not such as I
here express, I desire at least it should be such: I desire it
should be that contrite and humble heart, which thou dost never
despise. In this disposition of soul, and with a lively
confidence in thy mercies, and in the merits of the death and
passion of Jesus Christ thy Son, I renew the petition I made
before, and once more I beg of thee for myself, thy grace,
protection, and a happy delivery; and for my child, that thou
wouldst be pleased to preserve it for baptism, sanctify it for
thyself, and make it thine for ever; through the same, &c.


          The Litany Of Divine Providence.

    _A short Instruction to the Devout Reader._

  That we may be equally disposed and subordinate to the designs
  and directions of Divine Providence, as well in adversity as in
  prosperity, and receive with equal gratitude its decrees and
  appointments, is the end of the ensuing devotion or litany.
  Three particulars we ought to keep in view:

  1. That we bow our heads with the greatest submission,
  humility, and resignation to the will of God, manifested to us
  in the order of his Divine Providence.

  2. That we place a full confidence and reliance in his
  favourable intentions in our regard.

  3. That our behaviour be such as to draw on us his favour and
  protection, and that we may be thoroughly grateful and
  acknowledging for blessings conferred on us through his Divine
  Providence.

{230}

                   The Litany.

Lord, have mercy on us.

Christ, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

Christ, hear us. Christ graciously hear us

God the Father, whose holy providence  governs all things,
  _Have mercy on us._
God the Son, Redeemer of human kind,
  _Have mercy on us._
God the Holy Ghost,
  _Have mercy on us._
Holy Trinity, one God, unchangeable Providence,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, that governs all things in heaven and earth,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, that gives, preserves, and governs our life,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, the eternal love of man below and angels above,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, ever conformable to
the influence of the tender heart of Jesus,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, that created, directs,
and governs all things, with weight,
measure, and wisdom,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, our hope, life, and salvation,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, defence and comfort of the afflicted,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, guide and support of souls in all dangers,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, that provides us with,
and imparts to us, all natural and supernatural gifts,
  _Have mercy on us._

{231}

Divine Providence, inexhaustible treasury
Of the riches of heaven,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, protector and defence of the just,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, safe retreat and sanctuary to the miserable,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, our resource in all wants,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, our anchor in storms,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, our security in danger,
our way and secure haven,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, remedy in all evils, food to the hungry, and
fountain of refreshing water to the thirsty,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, raiment to the naked, strength to the weak,
protector and mother to widows and orphans,
  _Have mercy on us._
Divine Providence, refuge of sinners,
  _Have mercy on us._
Providence of God, who rules all things, infinitely deserving of
our homage and adoration:
  _Spare us, O Lord,_
Providence of God, which protects and conserves all things,
infinitely worthy of our homage and adoration:
  _Hear us, O Lord._
Providence of God, which created and knows our weakness,
infinitely above our homage, and adoration:
  _Have mercy on us, O Lord._
V. We praise and adore thee, Divine Providence.

R. We resign ourselves to thy just and holy designs.

{232}

                   Let Us Pray.

Eternal God, whose eyes are over all thy works, especially intent
on thy servants, vouchsafe to turn away from us whatever is
hurtful, and grant us whatever is advantageous, that through thy
favour, and under the benign influence of thy special providence,
we may securely pass through the transitory dangers and
difficulties of this life, and happily arrive at the eternal joys
of the other: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

_Anth._ By thy immaculate conception, and most spotless
virginity, O ever holy Mother of Christ, comfort of the
afflicted, be propitious to us, both now and in the hour of our
death.

V. In all our anguish and tribulation,

R. We fly to thee, O Mother of Mercy.


                A Prayer

Remember, O most pious and tender Virgin, that it is a thing
unheard of in all ages, that any one was abandoned by you, who
ran to you for succour, who implored your help, and begged your
intercession. Animated with this confidence, I, a wretched
sinner, place myself in sighs and groans before you, to entreat
you to adopt me for your child for ever, and to take my eternal
salvation into your own care. Do not, O Mother of the Divine
Word, despise my petition, but listen to me and hear me with a
mother's tenderness. Amen.

Great St. Joseph, admirable model of resignation, obtain for me
from my dear Saviour, who, to enforce your example, would submit
himself to be governed by you during the thirty years of his
hidden life, obtain for me from God the grace to imitate him, and
to resign myself perfectly to that so sure and so amiable
Providence, which, preserving me from ever going astray, may
procure me an unalterable peace in this life, and eternal
happiness in the next. Amen.


{233}

           The Litany Of St. Winefrid.


+ In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Lord have mercy on us.
Christ have mercy on us.
Lord, have mercy on us.
God the Father of heaven,
  have mercy on us.
God the Son, Redeemer of mankind,
  have mercy on us.
God the Holy Ghost,
  have mercy on us.
Holy Trinity, one God,
  have mercy on us.
Holy Mary,
  _Pray for us._
Holy Mother of God,
  _Pray for us._
Holy Virgin of Virgins,
  _Pray for us._
O blessed _St. Winefrid_,
  _Pray for us._
O humble and mild virgin,
  _Pray for us._
O glorious spouse of Christ,
  _Pray for us._
O devout and charitable Virgin,
  _Pray for us._
O sweet comforter of the afflicted,
  _Pray for us._
O singular example of chastity,
  _Pray for us._
O radient star,
  _Pray for us._
O fairest flower of the British nation,
  _Pray for us._

{234}

O admirable and elected vessel,
  _Pray for us._
O mirror of chastity,
  _Pray for us._
O mirror of devotion,
  _Pray for us._
O mirror of piety,
  _Pray for us._
O bright lamp of sanctity,
  _Pray for us._
O golden image of angelic purity,
  _Pray for us._
O hope and safety of distressed pilgrims,
  _Pray for us._
That we may be delivered from all iniquity,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may be delivered from all disordered passions of the
mind,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may be delivered from the deceits of the world, the
flesh, and the devil,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may be delivered from all occasions of sin,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may be delivered from plague, famine and war,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may be delivered from the wrath of God, and eternal
damnation,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we and all sinners may have true contrition, and full
remission of our sins,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That all schismatics, heretics, and infidels, may be converted to
the holy catholic and apostolic faith,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may always hate sin, and overcome all temptations,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may despise all worldly vanities and delights,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we all may ever fear God, and fulfil his holy will,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may have both spiritual and corporal health,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may devoutly desire chastity and purity of life,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._

{235}

That we may fervently love humility and mildness,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may delight in pious prayer, fasting, and charitable
alms,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may discreetly and fervently continue in the exercise of
godliness,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may cheerfully and constantly suffer for the love of
Christ,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That the souls in purgatory, and all afflicted persons may obtain
heavenly consolations,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That our benefactors, and all that labour to save souls, may be
blessed with abundance of grace and everlasting life,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That we may enjoy true peace and endless felicity,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That God, of his abundant mercy, may vouchsafe to bless this our
pilgrimage,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That by thy pious intercession, it may be to the perfect health
of our souls and bodies,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._
That thou wilt vouchsafe to grant our requests,
  _O holy virgin and mother, pray for us._

O blessed St. Winefrid, pray for us.

Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world:
  _Spare us, O Lord._
Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world:
  _Hear us, O Lord._
Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world:
  _Have mercy on us._
Christ hear us.
Christ graciously hear us.
Lord have mercy on us.
Christ have mercy on us.

{236}

Lord have mercy on us.

  Our Father, &c. Hail Mary, &c.
  V. The Lord be with you.
  R. And with thy spirit.


                   Let Us Pray.

Almighty and everlasting God, who hast adorned Saint Winefrid
with the reward of virginity; grant, we beseech thee, by her
pious intercession, that we may set aside the delights of the
world, and obtain with her the throne of everlasting glory;
through Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee liveth and reigneth
in the unity of the Holy Ghost for ever. Amen.


                 Another Prayer.

Almighty and everlasting God, grant we humbly beseech thee, that
blessed St. Winefrid, by her pious intercession, may obtain for
us such spiritual and temporal benefits as are expedient to thy
holy service and our eternal salvation: through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Son, who with thee and the Holy Ghost liveth and
reigneth, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

{237}

             A Hymn Of St. Winefrid.

  As the fragrant rose in pleasing spring,
    To God's own Son a spouse most dear,
  A martyr rare of Christ our King,
    St. Winefrid did flourish here.

  Descended great of British race,
    In faith was firm, in hope secure,
  With holy works and soul of grace,
    From worldly filth preserved pure.

  Caradock this sacred maiden slew,
    Because she did resist his lust;
  But heaven's immediate vengeance flew,
    And doomed his soul for ever curst.

  Stained with spots of reeking blood,
    Where Caradock's sword sever'd the head,
  A healing stream immediate flow'd,
    Perpetual token of the deed.

  Here God supreme doth wonders work,
    The blind to see, the dumb to speak;
  Diseases which in bodies lurk,
    Are cur'd where faith is not too weak.

  O glorious Virgin Winefrid,
    To us the raging sea appease;
  And free us so from Satan's dread,
    That he on us may never seize.


            A Prayer To St. Winefrid.

O blessed Winefrid! O pure Virgin, and glorious martyr, so
especially elected, so divinely graced, and wonderfully restored
from death to life! O singular hope of all that fly unto thee
with full confidence and humility. Though unworthy, yet we thy
devoted pilgrims make our addresses to thee! O sanctuary of
piety, look upon us with patient eyes, receive our petitions,
accept our offerings, and present our supplications to the throne
of mercy, that through thy powerful intercession God will be
pleased to bless this our pilgrimage, and grant us our requests
and desires: through Jesus Christ, his Son, who with God the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth ever one God,
world without end. Amen.

{238}

         Another Prayer To St. Winefrid.

O blessed Winefrid! O glorious Virgin and Martyr, who hast
admirably beautified with the purple of thy blood the rare purity
of thy innocent life, whom God has so specially chosen, so highly
privileged, and so wonderfully restored to life again, gracing
thee with the honour of a living martyr, causing a fountain
miraculously to spring, bearing a perpetual memory of thy name,
for the relief of all diseased and distressed pilgrims who shall
devoutly beg thy powerful intercession. O blessed Winefrid, hear
my prayers, and receive my humble supplications, or any poor
devoted pilgrim's, and obtain that by thy pious intercession,
God, of his infinite mercy, will be pleased to grant us a full
pardon and remission of our sins, and a blessing to this our
pilgrimage, and that we may increase and persevere in God's
grace, and enjoy him eternally in heaven. This we beg of thee, O
blessed Virgin and Martyr, for Jesus Christ our Lord and
Saviour's sake. Amen.

{239}

                 The Golden Litany,

  Briefly Commemorating Our Blessed Redeemer's Life

                   And Passion.


Lord, have mercy upon us!
_Christ, have mercy upon us!_
Lord, have mercy upon us!

God, the Father Almighty,
Creator of heaven and earth,
  _Have mercy upon us._

God, the Son, Redeemer of the world,
  _Have mercy upon us._

God, the Holy Ghost, Sanctifier of mankind,
  _Have mercy upon us._

O sacred Trinity of Persons, in unity of essence,
  _Have mercy upon us._

O blessed Jesus, true God and true man,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy power in creating heaven and earth,
and all things therein contained,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy goodness in making man to
thine own image and likeness,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy mercy in redeeming man after his fall,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy unspeakable love, in making choice of the blessed
Virgin Mary for thy Mother,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the ineffable mystery of thine Incarnation, whereby thou
didst vouchsafe to unite thy divine person to our frail nature,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{240}

Through thy immaculate Conception, and nine months imprisonment
within the sacred body of the blessed Virgin Mary,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy blessed nativity in the poor stable at Bethlehem,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the hunger, cold, and the other inconveniencies thou
didst endure in thy tender body, when laid in the crib between an
ox and an ass,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy painful circumcision, on the eighth day after thy
birth, when thou didst first shed thy precious blood for our
sake,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the adorable name of Jesus,
which was then given thee,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the mystical offerings of gold, frankincense, and myrrh,
which the wise men presented thee, whom by a miraculous star thou
didst summon out of the East, to adore thee in thine infancy,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the oblation thou didst make of thyself to thine eternal
Father, when in the temple thou wert acknowledged by Simeon and
Anne, and ransomed with a pair of doves by thy poor Virgin
Mother,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy flight into Egypt to avoid the cruelty of king Herod,
and all thou didst there suffer with thy blessed Mother and St.
Joseph,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy return from thence to Nazareth, and the obedience
thou didst there pay to thy parents,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{241}

Through thy being lost by thy parents in Jerusalem, where thou
wert again found by them, after three days' search, sitting in
the temple in the midst of the doctors,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the sacred and hidden life thou didst lead in Nazareth,
with holy Mary and Joseph, from the twelfth to the thirtieth year
of thine age,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy humble reception of baptism in the river Jordan by
the hands of St. John,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy forty days' fast in the desert, where thou didst
obtain repeated victories over the three temptations of the
devil,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy first miracle of changing water into wine at the
marriage feast of Cana,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the zeal which thou didst show for the honour of thy
eternal Father, in casting the buyers and sellers out of the
temple,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy condescending to discourse with
the Samaritan woman sitting at the fountain.
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy excessive charity in healing the young man of
Capharnaum, Simon Peter's mother-in-law, and a multitude of other
infirm persons,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the power thou didst manifest in appeasing the tempest at
sea, walking on the water, and enabling St. Peter to do so
likewise,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{242}

Through thy efficacious calling of Peter, Andrew, James, and
John, from their boats, and Matthew from the receipt of custom,
to follow thee,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the choice of thy twelve apostles, and the divine sermon
thou didst deliver to them on the Mount, in which is exhibited
the model of a perfect Christian life,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the mercy thou didst show to the penitent Magdalen,
preferring her to the Pharisee, and pardoning her sins,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the sending of the apostles to preach thy gospel to the
people,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy miraculous feeding of five thousand persons with five
loaves of bread, and four thousand with seven loaves,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy appointment of Peter to be the rock on which thou
wouldst build thy church, for his having confessed thee to be
Christ the Son of the living God,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy glorious transfiguration on Mount Thabor, in the
presence of three of thy disciples,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy instructing us in the virtue and efficacy of prayer,
and by giving us a model thereof in the divine "Our Father," &c.
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy inflamed desire to redeem mankind,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{243}

Through thy meek and humble entry into Jerusalem on Palm-Sunday,
riding upon an ass,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy humility in washing the feet of thy disciples,
even those of the traitor Judas,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy ineffable love manifested in the institution of the
sacrifice and sacrament of thy precious body and blood,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the prayer thou didst thrice repeat in the Garden of
Mount Olivet, when a bloody sweat trickled down thine agonized
body,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy condescending to receive a kiss from the mouth of the
traitor Judas,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy being apprehended, bound, and brought before the
tribunals of Annas and Caiphas,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the blows, buffets, and opprobrious usage thou didst
endure the night before thy crucifixion,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy presentation to the pagan judge, Pilate, in the
quality of a notorious criminal,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy being sent before Herod, and scornfully treated by
that wicked king and his soldiers,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the cruel and contumelious whipping
thou didst endure at the pillar,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{244}

Through the barbarous clamours of the people to have Barrabas,
the murderer, released, and the innocent Jesus put to death,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the false accusations, suborned witnesses, slanders, and
calumnies, brought against thee by the Jews,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the shameful stripping off thy clothes, and exposing thy
naked body to the multitude,
_Have mercy upon us._

Through the pressing of a crown of sharp
pointed thorns on thy sacred head,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy being clothed in a purple garment, and derided as a
mock king, having a reed put into thy hand for a sceptre,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the scoffing salutations, insulting reflections, and
scornful adorations, whereby thou wert mocked by the Jews and the
soldiers,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through their spitting on thy divine face,
and striking thy sacred head,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy being exposed to the people in the most lamentable
condition, Pilate saying to the multitude: Behold the man!
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the horrid clamours and repeated vociferations of the
Jews, "Away with him! Crucify him!"
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy meek and patient hearing of the sentence of death
pronounced against thee,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{245}

Through thy bearing thy heavy cross on thy sacred shoulders,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the painful stretching of thy naked body on the cross as
on a rack, and fastening thy hands and feet thereto with gross
nails,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the compassion thou hadst for thy sorrowful Mother, and
beloved disciple, standing at the foot of thy cross,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy excessive charity in praying for thy persecutors, and
murderers, and in promising Paradise to the penitent thief,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the seven last speeches thou didst utter on the cross
whilst thou wast suspended thereon for the space of three hours,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the vehement thirst thou didst then suffer, and the gall
and vinegar which was given thee to drink,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy last agony, in which thou didst commend thy blessed
soul into the hands of thy heavenly Father,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the piercing of thy side with a lance,
and the water and blood which issued therefrom,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the descent of thy departed soul into Limbo, to conquer
the devils, and set the ancient fathers at liberty,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the taking down of thy dead body from the cross by
Joseph, of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, in order to its burial,
  _Have mercy upon us._

{246}

Through thy glorious resurrection from death to life on the third
day,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thy appearing to thy blessed Mother, to Mary Magdalen, to
Peter and the other apostles, frequently comforting and
confirming them during the space of forty days,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through thine admirable ascension into heaven, in the sight of
thy sacred Mother and thy disciples,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through the miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost on thy apostles
in the form of fiery tongues,
  _Have mercy upon us._

Through all thine actions and sufferings during thy thirty years
sojourning amongst men, and by all that is pleasing to thy divine
Majesty in heaven and on earth,
  _Have mercy upon us._

V, Graciously hear our prayers, O Lord.

R. And let our cry come unto thee.


                   Let Us Pray.

Vouchsafe, O Almighty and most merciful Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier, to have compassion, not only on us, but also on all
such as shall present the foregoing petitions to the throne of
thy mercy, in commemoration of thy sacred life and most bitter
passion.
{247}
We beseech thee also, for thine own dear sake, that thou wouldst
grant to us, our friends and benefactors, and to all those for
whom we intend or are bound to pray, the pardon of all past
offences, and preservation from future failings; that loving
thee, serving thee, and obeying thee, with the utmost fervour,
fidelity and perseverance, during the remainder of our earthly
pilgrimage, we may be at length admitted to the eternal enjoyment
of thy beatific presence in thy heavenly paradise. Amen.

May the blessing of Almighty God, the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, descend upon us, and dwell with us for evermore.
Amen.



           The Prayers Of St. Bridget.

    To Be Said In Honour Of The Sacred Wounds
             Of Our Blessed Saviour.


1. O most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, eternal sweetness of those who
love thee, joy above any desire, firm hope of the hopeless,
solace of the sorrowful, and most merciful lover of all penitent
sinners; who hast said, thy delight is to be with the sons of
men, for the love of whom thou didst assume human nature in the
fulness of time. Remember, most sweet Lord Jesus, all those sharp
sorrows which then pierced thy sacred soul, from the first
instant of thy incarnation, until the time of thy solitary
passion, pre-ordained from all eternity.
{248}
Remember, O most amiable Saviour, all those bitter anguishes thou
didst suffer, when at thy last supper thou didst wash the feet of
thy disciples, didst feed them with the sacred banquet of thy
precious body and blood, and most sweetly comforting them, didst
foretell them thy ensuing passion; after which, going to Mount
Olivet, thou saidst, "My soul is sorrowful unto death." Remember,
I beseech thee, O most sweet Saviour, that bitter grief and
anguish which thy sacred soul did suffer, when praying three
several times to thy heavenly Father, thou didst sweat water and
blood; thou wert betrayed by thy own disciple, apprehended by thy
chosen people, accused by false witnesses, unjustly judged by
three judges, and in thy elected city, in the paschal solemnity,
in the flourishing age of thy youth, wrongfully condemned, bound,
beaten, spurned, spit upon, despoiled of thy garments, and
clothed with others in scorn; wert blind-folded, buffeted, spit
upon again, bound naked to a pillar, most cruelly scourged,
crowned with thorns, struck with a reed, and afflicted with
innumerable other torments, pains, and injuries. O my Lord Jesus,
by the memory and merit of all those bitter pains and anguishes
before thy last expiration on the cross, vouchsafe to grant me
before my death, true contrition, entire confession, a flowing
fountain of tears, full satisfaction, and a plenary remission of
all my sins. Amen.

O most gracious Lord Jesus, be propitious to me a sinner.
Pater Noster. Ave Maria.

{249}

2. O most sweet Lord Jesus, true liberty of angels, and paradise
of delights, remember, I beseech thee, that grief and sorrow
which thou didst suffer when thy cruel enemies, like fierce
lions, with furious and dreadful looks, compassing thee round
about, did tear off thy hair, spit upon thy sacred face,
scratched, beat, buffeted thee, and with all manner of
unheard-of-injuries, outrages, and torments, didst most cruelly
and basely blaspheme, scorn, and affront thee. O most sweet Lord
Jesus, by all those most barbarous and inhuman outrages which
thou didst suffer, vouchsafe to deliver me from all my enemies,
visible and invisible; that, protected under the shadow of thy
wings, I may safely arrive at the port of eternal glory. Amen.

O most gracious Lord Jesus Christ, be propitious to me a sinner.
Pater Noster. Ave Maria.

3. O most sweet Lord Jesus, omnipotent creator and fabricator of
the world, and repairer of mankind, who containest both heaven
and earth in thy hand, and whose immensity no bounds can limit;
remember, I beseech thee, the bitter pains and anguishes which
thou didst endure, when the perfidious Jews pierced thy delicate
and tender hands and feet with most rough and blunt nails,
stretching them forth so violently with cords to the holes which
they made in the cross.
{250}
Thus they heaped dolors upon dolors, most cruelly disjointing all
thy bones, breaking all thy veins, and renewing all thy sacred
wounds. O most sweet Jesus, by the memory of all these thy pains
and torments upon the cross, vouchsafe to give me thy fear and
love, with perfect charity towards my neighbour. Amen. O most
pious Lord Jesus, &c. &c.

4. O most sweet Lord Jesus, heavenly physician of human nature,
and eternal king, remember, I beseech thee, all those bitter
pains and torments which thou didst endure in thy sacred members,
who, being hoisted up upon the cross, with all thy precious body
rent and torn, not having from the crown of thy head to the sole
of thy foot any part left unhurt; so that no dolor could be
compared to thine; at which time, being unmindful of thy own
torments, thou didst mercifully pray to thy heavenly Father for
thy cruel enemies, saying: "Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do." O most meek and merciful Lord Jesus, by this
thy admirable benignity, goodness, love, and mercy, and by all
thy bitter pains and torments, grant that the memory of thy
dolorous passion may be a most powerful protection of my soul and
body, against all deceits, temptations, and molestations of the
devil, my cruel enemy. Amen.

O most merciful Lord Jesus, &c.

{251}

5. O most sweet Jesus Christ, mirror of eternal brightness, and
wisdom of the omnipotent Father, remember the bitter grief and
sorrow thy sacred soul did feel, when beholding, in the clear
mirror of thy divine presence, the predestination of thy elect,
who through the merits of thy most salutary passion were to be
saved; and the reprobation of the wicked, who for their
ingratitude were to be damned; and the abyss of thy immense
mercy, by which thou didst commiserate and shed tears for us,
miserable, lost, and forlorn sinners; and chiefly by that mercy
which thou didst show to the thief upon the cross, saying to him,
"This day thou shalt be with me in paradise;" I beseech thee, O
most sweet Lord Jesus, my Lord and my God, to show the like mercy
unto me, now and at the hour of my death. Amen.

O most sweet Lord Jesus, &c.

6. O most sweet Lord Jesus, omnipotent king and most amiable
friend, remember the bitter grief and sorrow thy sacred soul did
suffer, when, being forsaken of all thy friends, and
acquaintances, thou didst hang naked, rent, and torn upon the
cross; not having any to comfort or compassionate thee, only the
blessed and glorious Virgin Mary, thy mother; who standing under
the cross in the bitterness of her soul, accompanied thee in all
thy torments; unto whom thou didst commend thy beloved disciple,
St. John, in thy place, saying unto her, "Woman, behold thy son;"
and after, to thy disciple, "Son, behold thy mother."
{252}
O most sweet Lord Jesus, by that sword of sorrow which did then
transpierce her sacred soul, and by the tender love and
compassion wherewith thou didst behold the sad distresses of thy
sorrowful mother, have pity and compassion on me, I beseech thee,
my dearest Lord, and mercifully help, comfort, succour, and
assist me in all my tribulations, adversities, necessities,
sorrows, and sufferings, both spiritual and corporal. Amen.

O most blessed Lord Jesus, &c.


7. O most sweet and blessed Lord Jesus, crown of joy, treasure of
felicity, sweet source of consolation, and unexhausted fountain
of mercy; who, hanging on the cross, out of the most inflamed
desire thou hadst for the salvation of our souls, saidst, _I
thirst;_--viz. for the redemption of mankind. O dearest Lord,
by this, thy ardent charity, inflame our hearts with thy holy
love, kindle our desire to accomplish diligently all good works,
and wholly to extinguish the heat of all evil concupiscence and
worldly affections in us. Amen.

O most sweet Lord Jesus, &c.


8. O most sweet Lord Jesus, the true light of those who believe
in thee, suavity of hearts, and sovereign solace of all faithful
souls, by that bitter gall and vinegar thou didst taste upon the
cross at the hour of thy death, grant us, miserable sinners,
grace worthily to receive at all times, particularly at the hour
of our death, thy most precious body and blood; that by the
virtue of this divine banquet, and all other salutary sacraments,
we may be preserved from all evils, sin, and punishments, and
replenished with all joy, and securely appear in thy divine
presence. Amen.

O most sweet Lord Jesus, &c.

{253}

9. O most sweet Lord Jesus, source of all regal virtue, and all
mental jubilee, remember, I beseech thee, those excessive pains
and anguishes thou didst endure for us upon the cross, when,
through the bitterness of death, and the impious blasphemies,
derisions, scorns, and reproaches of the Jews, with a loud voice
and weeping eyes, thou didst cry to thy heavenly Father, with
this sad complaint: "Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani?" that is to say,
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" O most sweet Lord
Jesus, by this thy bitter torment, sorrow, grief, and anguish,
vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to have pity on me, and to succour me
in all my sorrows, sufferings, and tribulations, and particularly
at the hour of my death. O then, my dearest Lord and my God,
succour me, and forsake me not, I beseech thee. Amen.

O most gracious Lord Jesus, &c.

{254}

10. O most sacred Lord Jesus, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
ending of all things, and mirror of all virtue, remember how,
from the crown of thy head to the sole of thy feet, thou wert
immerged in the deluge of thy dolorous passion, for the love of
us, vile sinners. O most sweet Lord Jesus, by the length,
breadth, greatness, and multitude of thy sacred wounds, take from
me the love of the world, and teach me by a true and perfect
charity, always to keep thy holy law and commandments. Amen.

O most wise Lord Jesus, &c.


11. O most sweet Lord Jesus, sovereign goodness, eternal
beatitude of thy saints, and most profound abyss of mercy, by the
deep wounds which did not only transpierce thy sacred flesh, but
even thy bowels, and the marrow of thy bones, be merciful to me a
miserable sinner, who now am drowned in my sins and iniquities,
and hide me in thy sacred wounds from the face of thy wrath,
until thy indignation be passed and appeased. Amen.

O most potent Lord Jesus, &c.


12. O most sweet Lord Jesus, mirror of verity, pledge of unity
and bond of charity! remember the innumerable multitude of all
those painful wounds wherewith thou wert covered from head to
foot, all thy holy body most cruelly rent and torn by impious
Jews, and dyed with thy most precious blood; all which most
dreadful dolors thou didst endure for us vile sinners. O most
gracious Lord, engrave those thy dolors deeply in my heart, and
write them there with thy precious blood, that in them I may
always read thy love and dolors; so that the memory of thy
painful passion may daily be renewed in me, and my love increase
towards thee, and I remain perpetually thankful to thy immense
charity, to the last period of my life, until I come to enjoy
thee, my only dear Lord, and most desired treasure, abounding
with all joy and felicity: which through thy goodness be pleased
to grant, O most sweet Lord Jesus. Amen.

O most noble Lord Jesus, &c.

{255}

13. O most sweet Lord Jesus, most victorious lion, most
invincible, triumphant, and immortal king! remember, I beseech
thee, all the bitter pains and anguishes thou didst endure, when
all the forces of thy heart and body failing, bowing down thy
sacred head, thou saidst: "It is consummated." O dearest Lord, by
these thy deadly dolors, have mercy on me at my last passage,
when my heart and soul shall be in anguish and anxiety. Amen.

O most noble Lord Jesus, &c.


14. O most sweet Lord Jesus, only begotten Son of the eternal
Father, figure of his substance, and splendour of his glory!
remember that most earnest recommendation wherewith thou didst
commend thy sacred, sweet soul, to thy omnipotent Father, upon
the cross, saying: "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit."
At which time thou didst hang naked on the cross, with thy most
holy body all over wounded, rent, and torn, pouring forth streams
of thy most precious blood; with thy face pale and wan, thy head
crowned with thorns, thy arms extended, thy hands nailed, thy
veins bleeding, thy bowels of mercy opened, thy eyes weeping and
obscured, thy voice failing, thy breast thirsting, and wholly
heart-broken.
{256}
O my most merciful Lord, unto all these cruel pains and torments
didst thou deliver thy most sacred, innocent, tender, pure, and
precious body for the redemption of us most wretched, vile, and
miserable sinners, and in this manner, renderest thy sweet soul
to thy celestial Father; by which most precious and innocent
death of thine, and by the virtue of thy holy cross, I beseech
thee, O Father of mercy and omnipotent King of saints, to give me
grace to resist the world, the flesh, and the devil; that being
dead to all terrestrial things, I may live to thee alone, and
have the happiness to be received by thee at my last passage,
when this my miserable exile shall be ended. Amen.

O most pious Lord Jesus, &c.


15. O most sweet Lord Jesus, most flourishing, true, and fruitful
vine, remember the super-abundant effusion of thy precious blood,
which thou didst pour forth so plentifully from all parts of thy
holy body, like a cluster of pressed grapes; when thou thyself
alone didst tread the vine-press on the cross, and out of thy
pierced side didst give us water and wine to drink, not leaving
so much as one drop, being like a bundle of pure and precious
myrrh: thou wert suspended on high upon the cross, at which time
the liquor of thy bowels dried up, the marrow of thy bones
consumed, and thy most delicate and tender body wholly fainted
and failed.

{257}

O most sweet Lord Jesus, by this most liberal effusion of thy
precious blood, by thy bitter death and passion, and all thy
sacred wounds, vouchsafe to wound my heart with that tender love,
wherewith the holy heart of thy most blessed mother was wounded
under the cross, that tears of love and penance may be my bread
day and night; and convert me wholly to thee, that my heart may
be thy perpetual habitation, my conversation pleasing and
acceptable to thy divine Majesty, and the end of my life so
laudable, that having finished this mortal pilgrimage, I may be
admitted into immortal glory, to praise and glorify thee my
sovereign Lord, in the sweet society of thy holy angels and
saints, to all eternity. Amen.

O most gracious Lord Jesus, be propitious to me a sinner.
Pater Noster. Ave Maria.


                   Conclusion.

O most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, vouchsafe
to receive these prayers, in union with that most excellent love
wherewith thou didst suffer all the wounds of thy most precious
body; and be merciful to me thy poor, unworthy servant, and all
sinners, with all faithful souls, both living and dead;
graciously granting to us all mercy, grace, remission of sins,
and life everlasting. Amen.

{258}

                 Devotions To The

                Sacred Heart Of Jesus.


  That the Associates of the Sacred Heart may discharge the
  obligations required of them, they should daily repeat one
  _Pater_, one _Ave_, and the _Creed_, with the
  following aspiration:
  _Adorable Heart of Jesus, grant that I may increase in thy
  love_. They should also spend one hour in the year, at their
  own choosing, in the presence of the blessed Sacrament, in
  making acts of reparation, &c.


              Act Of Consecration.

To thee, O Sacred Heart of Jesus; I devote and offer up my life,
thoughts, words, actions, pains, and sufferings. To thee I
consecrate my soul and body, with all the faculties and senses
thereof, so that no part of my being may any longer be employed,
but in loving, serving, honouring, and glorifying thee. Be thou,
O most Sacred Heart! the sole object of my love, the protector of
my life, the pledge of my salvation, and my secure refuge at the
hour of my death. Be thou also, O most bountiful Heart! my
justification at the throne of God, and screen me from his anger,
which I have so justly merited. In thee I place all my
confidence, and convinced, as I am, of my own weakness, I rely
entirely on thy compassionate mercy. Annihilate in me all that is
displeasing and offensive to thy pure eye.
{259}
Imprint thyself like a divine seal on my heart, that I may ever
remember my obligations, and never be separated from thee. May my
name also I beseech thee, by thy tender goodness, ever be fixed
and engraved in thee, O Book of Life! and may I ever be a victim
consecrated to thy glory, ever burning with the flames of thy
pure love, and entirely penetrated with it for all eternity! In
this I place all my happiness; this is all my desire, to live and
die in no other quality, but that of thy devoted servant. Amen.



    The Litany Of The Sacred Heart Of Jesus.

Lord, have mercy on us.
Christ, have mercy on us.
Lord, have mercy on us.
Christ, hear us.
Christ, graciously hear us.
God, the Father of heaven,
  _Have mercy on us._
God, the Son, Redeemer of the world,
  _Have mercy on us._
God, the Holy Ghost,
  _Have mercy on us._
Holy Trinity, one God,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, formed in the womb of the most Blessed Virgin,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, hypostatically united to the eternal Word,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, sanctuary of the Divinity, and tabernacle of the
most holy Trinity,
  _Have mercy on us._

{260}

Heart of Jesus, temple of sanctity and fountain of all graces,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, most meek and humble,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, most chaste and obedient,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, furnace of love, and source of contrition,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, treasure of wisdom and goodness,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, throne of mercy, and abyss of all virtues,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, sorrowful in the garden,
and spent with a bloody sweat,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, saturated with reproaches,
and consumed for our sins,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, made obedient even unto the death of the cross,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, pierced through with a lance,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, refuge of sinners,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, fortitude of the just,
and comfort of the afflicted,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, main strength of the tempted,
and terror of the devils,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, sanctification of hearts,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, perseverance of the good,
and hope of the dying,
  _Have mercy on us._
Heart of Jesus, joy of the blessed,
and the delight of all the saints,
  _Have mercy on us._
Lamb of God, who takest away the sins
of the world, spare us, O Jesus!
Lamb of God, who takest away the sins
of the world, hear us, O Jesus!

{261}

Lamb of God, who takest away the sins
of the world, have mercy on us, O Jesus!

V. O most sacred heart of Jesus, have mercy on us.

R. That we may worthily love thee with our whole hearts.


                   Let Us Pray.

O God, who out of thy immense love, hast given to the faithful
the most sacred Heart of thy Son, our Lord, as the object of thy
tender affection; grant, we beseech thee, that we may so love and
honour this pledge of thy love on earth, as by it to merit the
love both of thee and thy gift, and to be eternally loved by thee
and this most blessed Heart in heaven: through the same Jesus
Christ, our Lord. Amen.

Through thy sacred Heart, O Jesus, overflowing with all
sweetness, we recommend to thee ourselves, and all our concerns,
our friends, benefactors, parents, and relations, our superiors,
and enemies; take under thy protection this house, city, and
kingdom; extend thy care to all such as lie under any affliction,
and to those who labour in the agony and pangs of death; cast an
eye of compassion on the obstinate sinner, and more particularly
on the poor suffering souls in purgatory; as also on those who
are engaged and united with us in the holy confederacy of
honouring and worshipping thee. Bless these in particular, O
divine Jesus! and bless them according to the extent of thy
infinite goodness, mercy, and charity. Amen.

{262}

     A Reparation Of Honour To The Sacred Heart.


  To be made on the Feast itself, or at any other time, in
  presence of the Blessed Sacrament.

O most amiable and adorable Heart of Jesus! centre of all hearts,
glowing with charity, and inflamed with zeal for the interest of
thy Father and the salvation of mankind; O Heart, ever sensible
of our misery, and ever ready to redress our evils; the real
victim of love in the holy Eucharist, and a propitiatory
sacrifice for sin on the altar of the cross! seeing that the
generality of Christians make no other return for these thy
mercies, than contempt for thy favours, forgetfulness of their
own obligations, and ingratitude to the best of benefactors; is
it not just that we thy servants, penetrated with the deepest
sense of such indignities, should, as far as in our power, make a
due and satisfactory reparation of honour to thy most sacred
Majesty? Prostrate, therefore, in body, and humbled in mind,
before heaven and earth, we solemnly declare our utter
detestation and abhorrence of such conduct. Inexpressible, we
know, was the bitterness which the multitude of our sins brought
on thy tender heart; insufferable the weight of our iniquities,
which pressed thy face to the earth in the garden of Olives; and
insurmountable thy anguish, when expiring with love, grief, and
agony, on Mount Calvary, in thy last breath thou wouldst reclaim
sinners to their duty and repentance. This we know, O dear
Redeemer! and would most willingly redress these thy sufferings
by our own, or share with thee in thine!

{263}

O merciful Jesus! ever present on our altars, and with a heart
open to receive all who labour and are burdened! O adorable heart
of Jesus, source of true contrition, impart to our hearts the
true spirit of penance, and to our eyes a fountain of tears, that
we may bewail our sins, and the sins of the world. Pardon, divine
Jesus! all the injuries and outrages done to thee in the course
of thy holy life and bitter passion. Pardon all the impieties,
irreverences, and sacrileges, which have been committed against
thee in the holy sacrament of the Eucharist, since its first
institution:--graciously receive the small tribute of our
sincere repentance, as an agreeable offering in thy sight, and in
requital for the benefits we daily receive from thy altar, where
thou art a living and continual sacrifice, and in union with that
bloody holocaust thou didst present to thy eternal Father, on
Mount Calvary.

Sweet Jesus! give thy blessing to the ardent desire we now
entertain, and the holy resolution we have taken, of ever loving
and adoring thee, with our whole mind and with our whole heart,
in the sacrament of thy love; thus to repair, by a true
conversion of heart, and a zeal for thy glory, our past
negligence and infidelities. Be thou, O adorable Heart! who
knowest the clay of which we are formed, be thou our mediator
with thy heavenly Father, whom we have so grievously offended;
strengthen our weakness, confirm our resolution, and with thy
charity, humility, meekness, and patience, cover the multitude of
our iniquities. Be thou our support, our refuge, and our
strength, that nothing henceforward in life or death may separate
us from thee. Amen.

{264}

             Devotions For The Sick.

                   Instruction.

  The state of sickness and sufferings is to be regarded as a
  fatherly visitation, whereby God knocks at the door of our
  hearts, to put us in mind of our mortality. It is a call from
  heaven, a timely warning to prepare for eternity, by spending
  the remainder of our life in the love and service of our
  Creator. It is the _touchstone_ of patience, the school,
  or rather the _harvest_ of penance, resignation, and every
  Christian virtue. It is the _test_ of our love, by which
  we may judge whether we acquit ourselves of duties that are
  agreeable to nature, in conformity to the will of God, or only
  do them because they are agreeable to our own will. We know not
  what we are until we are tried. It costs us nothing to say, "We
  love thee, O God, above all things;" or to show the courage of
  martyrs at a distance, when we have nothing to cross or thwart
  our inclinations; but that love is sincere which stands the
  proof.

  If we loved God sincerely, we would on all occasions embrace,
  desire, and find no happiness but in the accomplishment of his
  holy will. We would be prepared to bear whatever crosses and
  calamities he is pleased to send us, with a patient
  resignation. We would rejoice in them as the greatest
  blessings, and the sources of immortal crowns. We would regard
  them as precious talents, to be improved by the increase of our
  love and affection for God, and the exercise of the most heroic
  virtues of self-denial, patience, humility, &c.

{265}

  To be dejected and impatient under sickness and trials, to
  indulge murmurs and complaints, to repine and call ourselves
  wretched and unhappy, &c, are signs that an inordinate
  self-love reigns in our hearts, and that we seek our own
  inclinations more than the will of God, who has bequeathed the
  cross to his elect, as their portion and inheritance in this
  world. It is in vain that we take the name of Christians, or
  pretend to follow Christ, unless we also carry our cross after
  his example. It is in vain for us to expect to be glorified
  with Jesus, unless we also suffer with Jesus. He sacrificed
  himself for us on the cross, that he might unite us, by it,
  eternally to himself. We cannot arrive at heaven by any other
  road. If we courageously embrace our cross, God will be our
  comfort and support, as he was the comfort and support of the
  holy martyrs under the most severe trials. He will not forsake
  us, unless we first forsake him by sin.

  Too nice and anxious a care of health, is also an evident sign
  of inordinate self-love, and hatred of mortification.
  Nevertheless, as a man is not master of his own life or health,
  he is bound to take a moderate and reasonable care not to throw
  either of them away, nor neglect the essential prescriptions of
  physicians in the simple and ordinary remedies and succours of
  medicine. But he who trusts more in the art of physicians than
  in the Lord, deserves to be disappointed, like Asa, king of
  Juda, who became the victim of death, because he placed more
  confidence in his physicians than in God. Wherefore a Christian
  in his sickness should, in the first place, consider God as his
  chief physician, make his peace with him, and seek the health
  of his soul, by having recourse to the holy sacraments in due
  time, whilst he is in a condition to receive them with the
  proper dispositions. If he be in debt, or has any restitution
  or satisfaction to make, he should take care to have these
  obligations discharged to the best of his power. He should
  settle his temporal affairs without delay, that he may wholly
  apply his thoughts afterwards, without any disturbance, to the
  care of his immortal soul. He ought to beg of God to extinguish
  in him all self-love, and to dispose of him as he pleases.
{266}
  He ought to excite in his soul devout acts of faith, hope,
  charity, contrition, patience, resignation, &c. He should
  endeavour to sanctify his sufferings, by receiving them from
  the hand of God, by bearing them in the spirit of penance, by
  offering them in satisfaction for his sins, and by uniting them
  with the sufferings of his blessed Saviour and Redeemer, Jesus
  Christ.--"_Omnia si pardas, animam servare memento_."
  "Although you should lose everything else, be careful to save
  your soul."


         A Prayer In The Beginning Of Sickness.

O my God, I accept this sickness with which thou art pleased to
visit me, as a favour from, thy heavenly hand. I accept all its
circumstances and consequences, in satisfaction for my sins. Thou
hast given me health and strength, O Lord, and thou hast taken
them away: may thy holy name, O Lord, be blessed for ever. I bow
down my whole soul to adore thee in all thy appointments. I
resign myself entirely into the hands of thy providence, and
acknowledge that thou dost treat me with too much indulgence. I
know I deserve greater evils than those I now endure, and that I
merit, by my sins, pains infinitely greater than even the pains
of hell, where I would long since have been, had not thy pure
mercy interposed between my soul and thy justice. Alas! how many
are now suffering there for crimes less than mine? My pains are
nothing in comparison to theirs. I have no reason to complain. O
may thy holy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. I offer
myself, with an entire submission, to suffer whatever thou
pleasest, as long as thou pleasest, and in what manner thou
pleasest.
{267}
May this sickness be to the honour of thy holy name, and to the
good of my soul. But, O Lord, have regard to my weakness, and
deal not with me according to my sins; but according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies have compassion on me. Confirm my
soul with strength from above, that I may be patient under all
uneasiness, pain, disquietudes, and difficulties of my illness.
Grant that I may cheerfully submit to them, as a just punishment
of my manifold offences, and duly offer them in conjunction with
the sufferings and death of my blessed Redeemer on the cross,
through whose merits I look for mercy, and hope to possess
eternal life. Have pity on me, O most loving father! clothe me
with thy grace, and receive me into the arms of thy mercy. Create
a clean heart within me, O God, and renew an upright spirit
within my bowels; cast out from thence whatever profanes or
defiles thy temple; destroy and root out what is displeasing to
thee, and lay in me the foundation of a new life, either for this
world or the world to come. I am heartily sorry that I ever
offended thy infinite goodness, in thought, word, deed, or
omission. I most humbly implore thy pardon for all my sins, I now
propose not to offend thee any more, and to avoid every thing
that may be to me an occasion of sin. I resolve to make
restitution and satisfaction for the injuries I have committed.
For the love of thee, I sincerely forgive all those who have
injured me or done me wrong; I beseech thee to pardon them and
grant them the same blessing that I desire for my own soul.
{268}
With the utmost humility I also heartily beg pardon of all those
to whom I have given any offence, whether by ill example, by
words, deeds, or any other way, deliberately or unknowingly. Thou
seest, O Lord, how frail I am, and that I am nothing but dust and
ashes; preserve me from all temptations, and be thou my defence
against all the assaults of the evil spirit, that in this
sickness I may no way offend thee: and if this is to be my last,
I beg of thee so to direct me by thy grace, that I may not
neglect the necessary means of salvation, nor be deprived of any
of those powerful helps which thou hast in thy mercy ordained for
the good of my soul. Prepare it, O Lord, for its passage into
eternity; that being perfectly cleansed from all my iniquities, I
may be admitted one day into the kingdom of thy glory, there to
love and praise thee for ever, in the company of thy blessed
angels and saints. Amen.

"Lord, thy thorns are my roses, and thy suffering my paradise."
  _St. Felix_.

"Tears of devotion are sweeter than the joys of theatres."
  _St. Augustine._


      A Prayer Before Receiving The Viaticum.

O my blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ, I firmly believe thou art
really present in this venerable sacrament, which I am now about
to receive by way of viaticum.
{269}
I believe it contains thy sacred body and blood, accompanied with
thy soul and divinity. I desire to receive this heavenly banquet
for thy honour and glory, and the good of my soul, that I may be
happily united to thee. I desire to commemorate thy sufferings as
thou hast commanded. But how shall I dare to approach thee?--so
wretched a worm, to so infinite a majesty! so filthy a sinner, to
so infinite purity and sanctity! It is therefore in thy mercy
that I place my whole trust; and since thou art pleased to invite
thyself into so poor, so wretched so mean a cottage as this of my
breast, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to grant me those graces, and
that reverence, humility, and devotion, which may prepare a fit
abode for thy reception. Cleanse my soul from every foul stain of
sin, clothe it with the nuptial garment of charity, and adorn it
with all virtues. I come to thee, like Magdalen, that I may be
delivered from all my evils, and that I may embrace thee, my only
good. I detest with my whole heart, all the sins of my past life,
because they have offended thy goodness. I desire to lay them all
down here at thy feet, to be cancelled by thy precious blood. I
am sorry for them, and will be sorry for them as long as I live.
I will bewail them in the bitterness of my soul. They are many
and grievous, it is true; yet they are nothing when compared to
thy boundless mercy, and to the infinite ransom of thy precious
blood.
{270}
Forgive me, then, sweet Jesus, for thy mercy's sake; have pity on
me and save me, since thou forsakest none that place their hope
in thee. I love thee, my God, with my whole heart and soul, and
above all things in heaven and on earth! at least I earnestly
desire so to love thee, and consecrate myself eternally to thee.
O come and take full possession of my heart for ever; I offer it
to thee without reserve; O come and inflame it with the celestial
fire of thy divine love, and let nothing in life or death ever
again separate me from thee. O sweet Jesus, prepare me for a
worthy reception of the blessing thou art now about to bestow on
me. I adore and worship thee, humbled in mind and body, and
confess myself to be nothing but dust and ashes in thy presence.
It is my confidence in thy goodness that makes me presume to
approach thee, for I cannot but acknowledge myself infinitely
unworthy. _Domine non sum dignus, &c._

For a Prayer after receiving the Viaticum, see page 128.


         A Prayer Before Extreme Unction.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who, in the abundance of thy mercy, hast
provided powerful resources for relief in all our necessities,
grant me grace to have recourse to them with such worthy
dispositions that my soul may partake of all those great
advantages and salutary effects which thou hast appointed in
their institution. Thou hast instituted the sacrament of Extreme
Unction for the benefit of the sick, who, in the extremity of
life, stand in need of more graces, more helps, and more
consolation, than ever.
{271}
I now desire to receive this heavenly medicine, for the ends for
which it has been instituted. I am willing to be anointed, as
thou hast commanded by thy apostle St James. Grant, I beseech
thee, that this holy Unction may produce in me all its happy
fruits, by healing my soul from the ulcers of sin, by fortifying
me against all temptations, by supporting me in the hour of
anguish and distress, and by preparing me for a happy passage out
of this life, or whatever may be thy holy will. Shouldst thou
foresee that my health may be conducive to thy greater glory, and
expedient for my eternal salvation, let this be the means to
restore it. I absolutely submit myself to thy divine will and
pleasure. I wish not to live but to serve thee. Dispose of me as
thou knowest best; do with me as thou pleasest. All I desire is
the accomplishment of thy most holy will. Give me health or
sickness, life or death; give me whatsoever thou pleasest: not my
will, O Lord, but thine be done: it is a greater happiness to
fulfil thy will, than to enjoy ten thousand lives. O how happy
should I be, if the destruction of my body could repair the
injury I have offered to thy divine Majesty! My _eyes_,
alas! have seen vanities; my _ears_ have been open to
detractions, to profane and unprofitable discourses; my
_tongue_ has many ways offended thee, both in speaking and
tasting; my _hands_ have contributed to my follies; my
_feet_ have often gone astray in the paths of vanity and
sin.
{272}
By this holy anointing, and the prayers of thy church, pardon me,
O Jesus, all the sins I have ever committed by these my five
senses. Let those avenues through which sin has made its way into
my soul, be now shut to the world; let my eyes be open to thee
alone, my Jesus; let my ears be now attentive to thy commands,
and to thy call; let my tongue be solely employed in crying out
for mercy; let my prayers ascend like incense in thy sight; let
my hands be lifted up to heaven for pardon; let my feet walk in
thy ways; and let my heart be the living temple of the Holy
Ghost. Into thy hands, O dear Jesus, I commend my spirit. In thee
I will live, in thee I will die, in thee I will abide, and in
thee I hope to possess eternal rest and heavenly joy for ever and
ever. Amen.


           A Prayer After Extreme Unction.

O my God, thou hast created, redeemed, and sanctified me; thou
hast preserved me in many dangers both of soul and body; thou
hast nourished me with the adorable sacrament of thy body and
blood, and granted me the grace to receive the rights of thy
church, preferably to so many others, who are carried off by a
sudden death, without being favoured with those succours and
graces which thou hast bestowed upon me, a most ungrateful
sinner.
{273}
For these and all thy other blessings, I offer thee innumerable
thanks. O that I had as many tongues and hearts as there are
stars in the heavens, atoms in the air, and creatures in the
universe; how willingly would I employ them all in praising,
loving, and glorifying thee! To thee I resign my heart: receive
it as a holocaust. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit:
receive me, O dear Jesus, in thy mercy; receive me into thy
loving arms, which were stretched forth on the cross for my
redemption; receive me into the embraces of thy infinite charity.
I do not desire to be freed from my pains; thou knowest what is
best for me: do but take from me all murmuring, and give me
patience to suffer whatever thou willest, and as long as thou
pleasest. Should it be thy divine pleasure to inflict on my weak
body and languishing soul greater punishments than I now suffer,
my heart is ready, O Lord, my heart is ready to accept them, and
to suffer in whatever manner and measure may be most conformable
to thy will. This one grace I most earnestly beg of thee, my
God--_that I may die the death of the just_, and be
admitted, after the sufferings and tribulations of this
transitory and sinful life, into the kingdom of thy glory, there
to see and enjoy thee, in the company of the blessed, for a
never-ending eternity. Amen.

{274}

      Short Acts Of Virtue In Time Of Sickness.

I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am a sinner; accept, therefore, of
what I now suffer, in atonement for my sins. Help me to receive
with submission and resignation, whatever afflictions thou shalt
please to send me.

I am content to suffer here, provided thou dost spare me
hereafter. I know that it is by many tribulations we must enter
into the kingdom of heaven. I know that those who would be
glorified with Jesus, must also suffer with Jesus. I am
convinced, that the sufferings of this present time are not to be
set in competition with the eternal glory which shall be revealed
in us. I believe that the present momentary and light tribulation
worketh in us, above measure, an eternal weight of glory.

I offer myself, and all that I have, or am, to thee. Do with me,
my God, whatever thou pleasest. Shall I not drink the cup which
my Father hath given me? Not my will, but thine be done.

O sweetness of my heart, and love of my soul! take off my heart
and thought from this world, that all my comfort may be in thee.
O when will thy kingdom come? O Lord, when wilt thou perfectly
reign in all hearts? when shall sin be no more? Wound my heart
with thy love, that it may relish nothing that is earthly. O that
I had never offended so good a God! O that I had never sinned!
Happy those souls that have always preserved their baptismal
innocence.

{275}

O my God, all my hopes are in thee.--Through Jesus Christ my
Redeemer, I hope for mercy, grace, and salvation.

O sweet and adorable Jesus! O spotless Lamb! O innocent victim!
who by thy passion and death hath effaced the sins of mankind,
blot out my iniquities, and do not permit that thy sufferings
should become useless to me.

Look, O God, on this poor piece of clay, and help me in my
distress. O my Jesus! I love thee; I love thee above all things,
and desire to love thee alone, because thou alone art worthy of
my love.

I cast myself into the arms of thy holy love. I abandon myself
entirely to thy blessed will. My unworthiness humbles and
confounds me; but the sight of thy wounds, O Jesus, proclaims
aloud how great thy mercy is, and how far it exceeds my misery.

O boundless love of my Jesus! inflame my heart with thy heavenly
fire. Consume in me all earthly affections, and confirm my soul
in thy holy love for ever.

O Jesus, torn with stripes, pierced with thorns, and weltering in
blood, for my sake! teach me to endure for the love of thee, the
anguish and inconvenience of my infirmities and sickness.

{276}

O Jesus, raised upon the cross, attract me now most powerfully to
thyself, that my whole occupation may be to love, praise, and
adore thee for ever. Hail, sacred wounds of the hands and feet of
Jesus! Hail precious streams of blood, that flowed from those
painful wounds! Infinite praise, honour, and glory be to thee, my
amiable Redeemer, for suffering such pains for the love of me.
Ah, how does it pierce my heart with sorrow, to contemplate thee,
and to consider the torments thou didst suffer for my salvation.

Hail, sacred wound of the side of Jesus! hail, blessed passage to
the sacred heart of my divine Redeemer! O that I could
contemplate thee with the love of a Magdalen, and melt into tears
of sweet devotion in honor of thee! By the sacred wounds of thy
hands, of thy feet, and of thy side; by the precious streams that
flowed from them; by thy blessed heart, burning with love for me;
I beg and beseech thee never to forsake me, but to grant me
whatever thou seest necessary for the sanctification of my soul.

Glory be to the Father, who by his power hath brought me forth
from nothing, and made me to his own image and likeness. Glory be
to the Son, who by his wisdom hath delivered me from hell, and
opened for me the gates of Heaven. Glory be to the Holy Ghost,
who by his mercy hath sanctified me in baptism, and still
continues to sanctify me by the graces which I daily receive.
Glory be the three adorable persons of the blessed Trinity. O may
I behold and glorify eternally in heaven, what I believe, adore,
and worship on earth--one God and three Persons, the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

{277}

"Here we have no permanent city:
but we seek that which is to come."
  _Hebrews_ xiii. 14.

"While we are in the body we are strangers from the Lord."
  2 _Corinthians_ v. 6.

"Whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord."
  _Romans_ xiv. 8.


             A Prayer Of Thanksgiving,
               Upon The Recovery Of
         A Person From The Bed Of Sickness.

Almighty and everlasting God, I here acknowledge thy blessing in
the recovery of my health, and return thee my most hearty thanks
for it. I beg thy grace for the making a better use of it than
hitherto I have done; that I may correct all the errors of my
past life, that I may improve in virtue, be an example to others,
and dedicate that health to thee, which is now thy special gift;
that thus living to thee, I may be ever prepared for my last
hour: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Bless the Lord, O my soul; may he be praised and glorified for
ever.

Bless the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all his benefits.

Blessed be the Lord, God of our fathers; let praise and glory be
given to him for ever.

I will praise thee, O my God, while I live; I will glorify thy
holy name while I have my being.

O magnify the Lord with me, all ye holy angels: praise him, all
ye saints.

{278}

I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall be ever in
my mouth.

Give glory to the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth
for ever.

Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth, now, and for
ever.

From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the
name of the Lord is worthy of praise. Glory, &c.


               Preparation for Death

	           Instruction

  The last moments of a Christian are not only the most precious
  of his life, but to him of the greatest importance, as on them
  depends his eternal lot. It is then Satan uses his utmost
  efforts to accomplish the ruin of a soul. His snares and
  batteries are more subtle and violent at the extremity, than at
  any other period, of life; for it is then, as the apostle says,
  (_Revelation_ xii.) "he cometh down, having great wrath, knowing
  that he hath but a short time." Hence it becomes the
  indispensable duty of every soldier of Jesus Christ, frequently
  to exercise himself in acts of faith, hope, charity, confidence,
  fortitude, and perseverance; that by the familiar use of these
  spiritual weapons during life, he may be enabled to encounter
  the mortal enemy of his soul in his last conflict, and defeat
  all his malicious designs.

  When the disorder of a sick person has the appearance of
  danger, every spiritual help should be offered him before he
  loses the use of his senses; for which reason it would be very
  unfriendly to flatter him with the hopes of recovery, or to be
  negligent in exhorting him to make the best use of the little
  time which perhaps he has to live, in preparing for his voyage
  to eternity; and since a truly penitential spirit is the best
  security to a Christian in life or death, he ought to be urged
  to secure it to himself by the most perfect acts of
  compunction, resignation, faith, hope, and divine love. For
  this purpose he should keep himself as much as possible in the
  divine presence, and in the blessed company of Jesus Christ,
  the perfect model of suffering Christians.
{279}
  He should converse frequently with him, cast himself in spirit
  at his feet, like Magdalen; bewail his sins in the bitterness
  of his soul, and cry out for mercy while there is yet time for
  mercy. He should place a crucifix, or picture of his crucified
  Redeemer, before his eyes; think often upon his passion, his
  agony in the garden and on the cross; consider him nailed and
  fastened on that bed of sorrow, without moving either hand or
  foot, or having any other pillow to support his head but a
  crown of thorns. He should fly to his bleeding wounds, there to
  bathe his soul, and find a cure for all his disorders. He
  should be excited by these considerations to make a voluntary
  sacrifice of himself to the Divine Will; bear all his pains
  with patience; accept of death as the just punishment due to
  his sins; and offer it up in union with the death of Jesus
  Christ, that being united thereto, it may become precious in
  the sight of the Lord. He should frequently raise his thoughts
  above this world, and fix them on heaven--making it the object
  of his contemplation, and the centre of all his desires. He
  should consider what a happy thing it is to see and enjoy God
  eternally; and that the longer he remains here below, the more
  he lies exposed to the danger of offending him. Far, therefore,
  from being disturbed at the thoughts of quitting a wicked,
  treacherous, and deceitful world, he should rather endeavour to
  enter into the sentiments of St. Paul, who "longed to be
  dissolved, and to be with Jesus Christ." Instead of being sorry
  or unwilling to be disengaged from a frail body, subject to a
  thousand infirmities, he should rather, like King David, thirst
  after the happy hour that is to put him in possession of that
  eternal kingdom of glory, for the enjoyment of which he was
  created.

  In effect, if the _seafaring man_ long for his arrival in
  the port of his destination; if the _military man_ wish
  for an and of the campaign, and long for the day that is to
  restore him to his friends, crowned with laurels, and enriched
  with spoils and trophies; if the _wearied traveller_ pant
  after his native soil, and wish for the end of his journey; if
  the _captive_ long to be freed from his chains; if the
  _farmer_, after the toils and fatigues of the winter,
  rejoice at the bright prospect of the approaching harvest; why
  should not a _Christian_ long for the end of the laborious
  winter of this life, in order to reap the sweet fruits of his
  past labours?
{280}
  Why should he not be charmed with the well-grounded hope of
  _entering_ into the joys of his Lord, and finding the
  gates of heaven open to receive his soul? Why should he not
  wish to be _rescued_ out of the stormy sea of this world,
  and arrive safely in the harbour of eternal life? Why should he
  not long for the end of the _spiritual warfare_ wherein he
  is constantly engaged, in order to receive that never-fading
  _crown of glory_, which is reserved in the kingdom of
  heaven for such as _conquer?_ Why should he not welcome
  the happy hour of his death, which is to restore him to his
  native country, fix him in his proper habitation, secure him
  from the embarrassments and snares of this mortal life, and
  translate him to the glorious society of the holy apostles,
  martyrs, confessors, virgins, and an innumerable host of
  heavenly citizens, who await him, and long to congratulate his
  happy arrival? "Which amongst us," says St. Cyprian, "who for a
  long time had been a sojourner in a foreign country would not
  anxiously desire to return to his native soil? What person
  would not wish for a prosperous gale of wind to waft him with
  expedition to his favourite home, that he might the sooner
  embrace his friends and relations?" Heaven is our native
  country; here we are but strangers, captives, and pilgrims.
  Here we have no permanent city; but there we shall be at home
  in our Fathers house. Here we are exiles and travellers,
  hastening to the end of our journey. This world is a
  tempestuous ocean, full of rocks and quicksands, wherein we are
  constantly tossed to and fro by storms and hurricanes, tortured
  between hopes and fears, and every moment exposed to the danger
  of being shipwrecked. "O how happy are they," continues St.
  Cyprian, "who, after being delivered from these storms and
  hurricanes, have happily arrived at the haven of everlasting
  bliss!" How happy are they who are removed from the dangers of
  sin, and freed from the assaults of the devil, and the conflict
  of their passions! How happy are they who are withdrawn from
  the miseries of this perishable life, and have put on a
  glorious immortality! Who would not rejoice to obtain
  everlasting rest, out of the reach of danger? Who would not
  cheerfully quit this sinful Babylon, to spend an eternity in
  the presence of God, and live for ever with Jesus Christ, in
  the company of millions of saints and angels!
{281}
  O blessed be that Divine Providence, that infinite goodness,
  which has provided a better world to receive us, and there
  promises us eternal life: Hence hath St. Teresa exclaimed: "O
  death, I know not who can fear thee, since it is by thee that
  we find life."

  Too great a love of life betrays a want of that lively faith
  and confidence, which, by fortifying the mind of a Christian,
  enables him to stare death in the face, and despise that king
  of terrors. It is now more than ever incumbent on us to comply
  with the obligation we lie under, of suppressing inordinate
  self-love in our hearts, and of doing, not our own, but the
  will of our heavenly Father; for how inconsistent would it be
  to desire that _his will may be done on earth, as it is in
  heaven_, if upon summoning us to quit this world, we are
  reluctant and unwilling to obey his call? With what propriety
  can we say, _thy kingdom come_, whilst we evidently betray
  a desire of remaining here in a state of bondage to our
  passions and subjection to the devil, rather than accept the
  invitation to go and live with Jesus Christ, in the kingdom
  which he has purchased for us at the expense of his sacred
  blood. To die well or ill, is all that should give us trouble.
  We know for certain that death is the only way to eternal
  happiness; that the cross is the ladder by which we should
  ascend to heaven; and that through many sufferings and
  tribulations we must endeavour to enter into it. Christ himself
  died before he entered into his glory. We cannot arrive at
  heaven by any other road. It is the only gate to life
  everlasting. It is a passage from a valley of tears to a region
  of unspeakable bliss. It is a deliverance from a continual
  warfare, in which we are surrounded with a thousand dangers of
  perishing. It is a happy exemption from the temptation of the
  devil, the world, and the flesh, which are our capital enemies.
  Animated therefore, with a bright prospect of eternal happiness
  at our departure, we should consider the pangs of death as
  nothing else but the breaking down of that partition which
  stands betwixt the soul and the sight of its sovereign good.

  "The body is a tottering edifice, which must necessarily fall,
  that the soul may be at rest. It is like the scaffolding which
  architects make use of to erect a palace; but which they take
  away after the building is finished."--_Clement XIV.--Picture
  of Man_.

{282}

               Short Acts Of Virtue,

  Which may be leisurely and distinctly suggested to sick persons
  in time of danger, yet so as not to fatigue them with too much
  reading.


O my God, I firmly believe whatever thy holy Catholic Church
believes and teaches, and with the assistance of thy divine
grace, I will die in this belief. Increase, O Lord, and
strengthen my faith.

In thee, O Lord, I place my whole confidence. I hope to possess
eternal life through thy infinite mercy and the merits of my
Saviour Christ Jesus. O let me not be confounded for ever. My
God! I love thee with my whole heart and soul, above all things,
because thou art infinitely good and worthy of all love.

I love my neighbour, nay, and even my enemies, for the love of
thee. O my God, it grieves me to the soul for having so
ill-served so good a master. O that my heart could break asunder
with sorrow for having offended thee by the sins of my past life!
O that I had never offended so good a God! O unhappy day that I
neglected to love thee! Too late, too late have I begun to love
thee. I confess mine iniquities are many and grievous; but they
cannot lessen my confidence in thy mercies, which are infinitely
greater than my sins.

{283}

I most humbly ask pardon for them. I detest them because they
displease thee. O God, be merciful to me a sinner. O grant me a
true and sincere contrition, and let not the enemy of my soul
have any power over me, either now or at my last hour.

Pardon me, O Jesus. Hear me, O Jesus. Save me, O Jesus. I
renounce from this moment, and for all eternity, the devil and
all his works. I abhor all his suggestions and temptations. I
will, by no means, give admittance or consent to them.

Grant me, O Lord, the most precious gift of final perseverance,
that whenever my hour comes, I may die in thy grace. I beg pardon
of all those whom I have any way offended, and I sincerely
forgive all those who have any way offended or injured me, or who
wish me any kind of evil whatsoever.

I recommend my soul to God my Creator, who made me out of
nothing; to Jesus Christ my Saviour, who redeemed me with his
blood; to the Holy Ghost, who sanctified me in the water of
baptism.

Praise, honour, and glory, be to thy name for ever, O my God, for
all the graces and benefits which I have received from thy bounty
during the whole course of my life.

May thy providence be ever blessed and praised for all the
sufferings I have endured: O receive them in satisfaction for my
sins. I offer up to thee, O my crucified Redeemer, all that I now
suffer, or may have yet to suffer, to be united to, and to be
sanctified by thy passion.

{284}

I am content to suffer here, in hopes that my momentary pains and
sufferings will be soon changed into an eternity of happiness and
comfort.

Let the flesh suffer and perish, so that the spirit may be safe.
Scourge and afflict my body; and spare my soul for all eternity.
Here wound me, here burn me, here cut me asunder; but spare me at
my last hour.

My whole confidence, either of living or dying well, is grounded
on the infinite merits of my Redeemer's death and passion, and
the blood he hath shed for my sins.

Receive, O eternal Father, his precious merits, in full
satisfaction for all my offences. O let me never be separated
from thee.

Wound my heart with thy love, that it may relish nothing that is
earthly. Take off my thoughts from this mortal life, that all my
comfort may be placed in thee alone.

Dispose of my soul that it may be prepared at thy call to go
forth and meet thee, and become thy habitation for ever.

To thee I resign my heart, and bequeath my soul. O do not cast me
off amongst the reprobate; but make me fit to appear in thy
sight.

O happy hour! when shall I behold thee? O sweet Jesus! when shall
I appear before thy face? When shall I be disengaged from this
earthly habitation, that I may come to the enjoyment of thee?
When shall I be released from this prison, this miserable
Babylon, this place of banishment, that I may bless thy name, and
join with thy angels and saints in thy everlasting praise?

{285}

When shall I lay down this cumbrous weight of flesh, and be
delivered from this body of death, which I have loved too well?

Thou hast in thy justice decreed that I should die. I most humbly
submit to the sentence, and readily accept it in the spirit of
penance, in order to honour thee by the sacrifice of my life, and
to give a proof of my obedience to thy orders.

I am content to die for thy glory, and to testify that I love
thee better than myself.

I am content to die, that I may no longer offend thee, but that I
may love thee, possess thee, praise thee, bless thee, and glorify
thee for ever in heaven. I am content to die, to expiate by my
death and suffering, all the sins which I have committed since I
came into the world.

I am ready and willing to be deprived of every thing I have loved
upon earth. I renounce all the vanities of the world, and now
willingly bid farewell to this vale of tears and miseries.

Heaven is my happier home. Paradise is much more pleasant and
agreeable, and death is the path that leads to it.

O happy news of my departure! I hope I shall soon hear the choirs
of angels sing forth the immortal praise of my God. To dwell one
day in his holy palace, in the company of the blessed, is better
than to be a thousand years in the tabernacle of sinners.

{286}

Let slow death then hasten on, that dying I may be no longer
exposed to the dangerous occasions of sin, but that I may see and
enjoy thee, my God, in paradise, and love thee eternally in the
regions of bliss and immortality.

O heavenly Jerusalem! O beautiful city of God, my happy home!
when shall I arrive in thy sacred tabernacles?

Take courage, my soul. The hour approacheth. Eternity comes on.
Thy miseries and sorrows will soon have an end.

Thou art going to the nuptials of the Lamb. Thou art going to the
land of the living. Thou art going to a kingdom where the God of
all glory displays his grandeur with the greatest magnificence.

O welcome the approaching hour of death, which is to remove thee
to a better life, and to translate thee from misery to felicity,
from death to immortality.

Jesus Christ was crucified and died for thee. Be ready then to
die for him, that thou mayest enjoy him in the kingdom of heaven,
which he has promised to those who put their trust and confidence
in him. [_Here the assistants may show a crucifix to the sick
person_.] Contemplate him expiring on the painful bed of the
cross, without any other pillow to support his head but a crown
of thorns. Behold his merciful arms extended to embrace thee.
{287}
See his sacred side laid open to grant thee admittance to his
heart. See his blessed head laid down to give the kiss of peace.
See at how dear a rate he has purchased thy salvation. See what
he suffered for thy sake. Embrace him with the most tender
affection, and with a firm confidence that thou wilt soon see him
in heaven, whom thou now beholdest fastened on a cross. Yes, my
divine Redeemer, I embrace thee with all the affections of my
soul. I depend on thy merits, and take shelter in thy bleeding
wounds. I trust thou wilt not suffer me to be for ever miserable,
for thou art infinitely good and merciful. Since I have thy blood
to plead in my behalf, why should I fear? why should I tremble at
the thoughts of death, when I consider that thou hast satisfied
for my sins, paid my debts, and laid down thy life for my
salvation?

I am not afraid of hell, though I have deserved it, because my
dear Jesus has purchased heaven for me.

I hope in his mercy; and all the artifices of the infernal
spirits shall never induce me to relinquish my hope.

In spite of them all, I will sing eternal praises to thee, O
blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; I will adore thy
mercies, and will possess and love thee for ever.

{288}

I will now say what, perhaps, I shall not be able to say at my
dying moments:--"O Father of mercies, and God of all consolation,
into thy most merciful hands I commend my soul, both for time and
eternity."

Now, instead of then, when perhaps I may be deprived of the use
of speech and reason, I offer thee, O Lord, my heart, my life, my
agony, my pains, my anguish, my distress, and my death, to be
united to the blood, sweat and agony of my dear Saviour Jesus
Christ.

Now, as well as at the time of my departure, I renounce Satan,
and declare my abhorrence of whatever evil thoughts he shall then
suggest to me.

O God of my heart, my portion, and my inheritance for ever! I
desire to love thee, as the angels of heaven love thee. O how
good hast thou been to me, and how ungrateful have I been to
thee! I grieve from the bottom of my heart that I ever offended
thee, who art infinitely amiable. Forgive me, dear Jesus! forgive
me, O Father of mercies.

O my God and my all! my soul doth thirst after thee. When shall I
come and appear before thee, O thou fountain of mercy! O who will
deliver me from this body of death! I desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ; for Christ is my life, and to die will be my
gain.

How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts! I love the
beauty of thy house, and the place of thy glorious abode. "The
eye hath not seen, the ear hath not heard, nor hath it entered
into the heart of man to conceive, what things God hath prepared
for those who love him."

{289}

What have I more to do with the world? And in heaven, what can I
desire but thee only, O Lord? Now dost thou dismiss thy servant
in peace.

I am weary of this life. I willingly take my leave of this world,
and of all terrestrial objects.

Nothing, O good Jesus! nothing more shall ever separate me from
thee.

O holy Mary, mother of God, who didst assist at the death of thy
beloved son Jesus, obtain for me the grace of a happy death.

Glorious St. Michael, prince of the heavenly host, intercede for
me at the hour of my death, that I may depart this world in the
grace and favour of my Creator.

O holy Angel Guardian, to whose care God in his mercy has
committed me, stand by me at that dreadful hour; protect me
against all the powers of darkness: defend me from all my
enemies; and conduct my soul to the mansions of eternal repose.

O all ye blessed angels and saints of God, assist me by your
intercession, in this last and dreadful passage.

O Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, be thou
then to me a powerful redeemer and advocate with the Father.

Let those hands which were nailed to the cross, plead in my
behalf, and open to me the gates of heaven.

Be thou a Jesus to me, and save my soul at that awful period.
Hide me in thy wounds, and protect me under the shadow of thy
wings.

{290}

O good Shepherd of souls! do not forsake me, but conduct my soul
into eternal rest.

Suffer thy passion and death to stand betwix my soul and thy
justice; and let these comfortable words sound then in my ears:
"This day thou shalt be with me in paradise."

O sweet Comforter of desolate and distressed souls let me then
experience the multitude of thy tender mercies, when my soul
shall be in conflict with the pangs of death.

Be mindful of thy poor creature, whom thou hast redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Remember thou hast bought my soul at a dear rate. O let not thy
precious blood be lost on me, or spilt in vain.

O let not my soul perish, which cost thee so great a price.

Thou hast promised, that whosoever shall invoke thy name with
faith and confidence, shall be saved: I invoke thy sacred name, O
Jesus, with my whole heart, and with all possible respect and
devotion: do not then suffer me to be lost for ever.

Help me, O God my Saviour; and for the glory of thy blessed name,
deliver me. Look with an eye of pity on this poor piece of clay,
and succour me in my distress.

I beseech thee, by thy sufferings on the cross, especially at
that hour when thy blessed soul left thy sacred body, to have
mercy on my soul at the time of its departure from mine.

{291}

Call me to thyself, and receive me into the number of thine
elect, that I may praise thee without end.

O Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on me.

Give me thy blessing, O most loving Jesus. Lord Jesus, receive my
soul.

Receive me Lord Jesus, in thy mercy! receive my soul in peace.

Glory be to the Father, &c.


Post hominem vermis; post vermem fœtor et horror: Sic in non
hominem vertitur omnis homo.


             A Prayer By St. Liguori.

Ah, my Redeemer, how have I been able hitherto to live in such
forgetfulness of you? You were prepared to grant me all the
graces which I should ask of you; you only waited for me to ask
them. But I have thought only of indulging my senses, and have
been indifferent about the privation and loss of your love and of
your graces. Lord, forget all my ingratitude, and have mercy on
me. Pardon me all the displeasure I have given you, and grant me
perseverance. O God of my soul, give me the grace always to ask
your aid not to offend you. Do not permit me to be, as I have
hitherto been, negligent in the performance of this duty. Grant
me light and strength always to recommend myself to you, and
particularly when my enemies tempt me to offend you again.

{292}

Grant, O my God, this grace through the merits of Jesus Christ,
and through the love which you bear to him. O Lord, I have
offended you enough. I wish to love you during the remainder of
my life. Give me your love; and may this love remind me to ask
your aid whenever I shall be in danger of losing you by sin.
Mary, my hope after Jesus, through your intercession I hope for
the grace to recommend myself, in all my temptations, to you and
to your Son. Hear me, O my queen, through the love which you bear
to Jesus Christ.


          A Devout Prayer Of St. Augustine
            On The Sufferings Of Christ.

O God! who for the redemption of the world didst vouchsafe to be
born--to be circumcised--to be rejected by the Jews--to be
betrayed with a kiss--to be bound like a malefactor, and like an
innocent lamb to be led to the slaughter--to be ignominiously
brought before Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, and Herod--to be accused
by false witnesses--scourged with whips--buffeted--defiled with
spittle--crowned with thorns--stripped of thy clothes--fastened
to the cross, placed between two thieves--to have vinegar and
gall given thee to drink--to have thy side pierced through with a
spear! Thou, O Lord, by these most grievous pains, which I,
though unworthy, do commemorate, and by thy most sacred passion
and death, free me from the pains of hell, and conduct me whither
thy mercy did conduct the good thief crucified with thee: who,
together with the Father and the Holy Ghost, livest and reignest
for ever.

{293}

     A Prayer Of St. Jerome In Time Of Agony.

Merciful Jesus, thou art my strength, my refuge, and my
deliverer; in thee I have believed and hoped; in thee have I
loved. Call me now, I beseech thee, and I will answer.--Stretch
forth thy hand of mercy to the work of thy hands, and let me not
perish, whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood.

It is now time for dust to return to dust, and my spirit to thee
who gavest it. Open then, Lord, the gate of life, and receive me;
receive me most merciful Lord, according to the multitude of thy
tender mercies, who receivedst the thief on the cross, and now
prepare my soul for hearing the same promise of mercy which he
did. I am sick, O Lord, and my life is withering away; therefore
I come to thee my physician. Heal me then, my God, and I shall be
healed: let me not be confounded; because I put my trust in thee.
In thee have I hoped; let me not be cast off for ever.

But what am I, most merciful Lord, that I should speak thus
boldly to thee?--I am a sinner, grown up in sin, a rotten
carcass, a vessel of corruption, and food for worms. But spare me
still, my God; for what victory is there in overthrowing me, who
am but as dust before the wind? Forgive me all my sins, and
deliver me from my distress.

{294}

Arise and help me, Lord; arise and let thy mercy plead for me.
Let my prayer ascend before thee, and stretch forth thy hand to
help me; for behold I am covered with sin, and have done evil in
thy sight, and there is none can heal me but thou, my God. If
thou hadst not paid my ransom, by dying on the cross, should not
I have been for ever miserable? Remember then, O merciful Jesus,
that I have a share in that price that was paid. It was for me
also, though most unworthy, thy blood was shed; let me,
therefore, have a part in this mercy.

I confess I have many times offended against thee, and therefore
am not worthy to be called thy child; but turn away thy face, I
beseech thee, from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities. Deal
not with me according to what I deserve, nor chastise me
according to my iniquities; but help me, O God, my Saviour, and
for the glory of thy name deliver me. Now at this hour show mercy
to me, and whenever I depart receive me into the number of thy
family, that I may be one of those who are to praise thee for
ever.

{295}

     Prayers To Be Recited By The Assistants
   When The Dying Person Loses The Use Of Speech.

Lord Jesus Christ, we beseech thee, by thy bitter agony and
prayer in the garden, that thou wouldst be pleased to be an
advocate with thy eternal Father, in behalf of this thy servant:
lay before him (_her_) all those drops of blood which in thy
anguish of spirit flowed from thy body, and offer them for the
remission of all his (_her_) sins: that in this hour of
extremity, he (_she_) may be discharged from that
hand-writing of sin which stands against him (_her_), and
from that punishment which he (_she_) fears to be too justly
due to his (_her_) sins. "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.

Lord Jesus Christ! who for our salvation was pleased to suffer
death on the cross, we beseech thee to offer up all the anguish
and pains thou didst then endure, and most especially at the hour
of thy death, in behalf of this thy servant, that they may be
accepted in his (_her_) favour, for the good of his
(_her_) soul, for the obtaining of a happy hour, and for the
release from that punishment which he (_she_) has deserved
for his (_her_) sins. "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.

Lord Jesus Christ! who hadst such a boundless love for man as to
induce thee to become man for his salvation, we beseech thee to
let this thy infinite charity and goodness towards mankind, so
plead in behalf of this thy poor servant, that by thy powerful
mediation, his (_her_) soul, at the moment of its departure
from the body, being freed from the bonds of sin, may find a free
admittance through the gates that lead to the mansions of eternal
bliss. "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.

{296}

Lord Jesus Christ! who by thy precious blood hast redeemed us, we
beseech thee to imprint deep in the soul of this thy servant the
memory of thy most sacred wounds, that having them perpetually in
his (_her_) sight, he (_she_) may be encouraged to
suffer with patience and resolution, and be armed against all the
pangs of death. Thus let him (_her_) cheerfully submit to
all the difficulties of his (_her_) condition, and begin,
even here, to be united to thee with a love that shall never end.

Grant him (_her_) now to partake of the fruit of thy holy
incarnation, of thy bitter passion, of thy glorious resurrection,
and admirable ascension.

Grant that he (_she_) may be sensible of the effects of thy
holy mysteries and sacraments, and of all the prayers which are
offered by the whole church.

Remember, O Lord, that thou wast once in the straits of death;
and in this extremity, after crying out to thy eternal Father,
and commending thy spirit to him, didst expire. Behold now this
thy servant in his (_her_) anguish crying aloud to thee;
stand thou by him (_her_), defend and comfort him
(_her_) in this his (_her_) distress, and receive his
(_her_) soul into thy merciful embraces.

Remember, O Jesus, that thy arms were stretched forth, thy side
opened, and thy sacred head bowed down from the cross; have
regard now, we beseech thee, to the soul of this thy servant,
which, departing out of this world, seeks refuge in thee; receive
it into thy arms, clasp it to thy breast, and there let it hide
itself, secured from the attacks of all its enemies, till the
anger of God pass over.
{297}
Into thy hands we commend his (_her_) spirit, which has been
created and redeemed by thee, despise not, we beseech thee, the
work of thy hands.

O Christ Jesus, who was crucified for our redemption, we beseech
thee, by that love which brought thee from heaven, to have
compassion on the soul of thy servant; forgive him (_her_)
all his (_her_) sins, and by the merits of thy bitter
passion, satisfy for all his (_her_) failings, and supply
his (_her_) defects; let him (_her_) now experience the
multitude of thy tender mercies, and be sensible how good thou, O
Lord, art. Dispose now his (_her_) soul by thy grace, that
he (_she_) may be prepared at thy call to go forth to meet
thee, his (_her_) heavenly bridegroom. Grant him
(_her_), we beseech thee, true patience and perfect
resignation in his (_her_) pains and anguish. Give him
(_her_) full discharge from all his (_her_) sins;
confirm his (_her_) faith; strengthen his (_her_) hope,
and perfect his (_her_) charity; that departing hence, his
(_her_) soul may be received into thy mercy. O dear
Redeemer, by that distress which thou didst suffer on the cross,
when thou criedst out to thy eternal Father, we pray thee to show
mercy to this thy servant in his (_her_) extremity; hear the
sighs and desires of his (_her_) heart; and since he
(_she_) is now deprived of the faculty of speech, speak thou
for him (_her_) we beseech thee, who art the eternal Word,
and to whom the Father will refuse nothing.

{298}

By thy victory over death, and the infinite merits of thy
passion, we beseech thee, on behalf of this thy servant, to have
no other thoughts but of peace, of mercy and comfort, and not of
affliction. Bear him (_her_) up against all distrust and
despair; deliver him (_her_) from his (_her_)
necessities, and be his (_her_) comforter in his
(_her_) distress. Let those hands which were once nailed to
the cross, now plead for him (_her_) and obtaining his
(_her_) pardon, conduct him (_her_) into thy eternal
rest. Amen.


      The Recommendation Of A Soul Departing.

Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.

Holy Mary,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye Angels and Archangels,
  _Pray for him (her)._
Holy Abel,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All the choir of the Just,
  _Pray for him (her)._
Holy Abraham,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. John Baptist,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Joseph,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye Patriarchs and Prophets,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Peter and St Paul,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Andrew,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. John,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye holy Apostles and Evangelists,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye holy disciples of our Lord,
  _Pray for him (her)._

{299}

All ye holy Innocents,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Stephen,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye holy Martyrs,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St Sylvester,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Gregory,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Augustine,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Laurence,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye holy Bishops and Confessors,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Benedict,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St Francis,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye holy Monks and Hermits,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Mary Magdalen,
  _Pray for him (her)._
St. Lucy,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye holy Virgins and Widows,
  _Pray for him (her)._
All ye saints of God,
  _make intercession for him (her)_.
Be merciful,
  _spare him (her,) O Lord._
Be merciful,
  _deliver him (her,) O Lord._
Be merciful,
  _receive him (her,) O Lord._
From thy anger,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
From the danger of death,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
From an ill end,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
From the pains of hell,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
From all evil,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
From the power of the devil,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
Through thy nativity,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
Through thy cross and passion,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
Through thy death and burial,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
Through thy glorious resurrection,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
Through thy admirable ascension,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
Through the grace of the Holy Ghost, the comforter,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._
In the day of judgment,
  _Deliver him (her), O Lord._

{300}

We sinners,
  _beseech thee to hear us._
That thou spare him (_her_),
  _we beseech thee to hear us._

Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.

               Let Us Pray.

Depart then, O Christian soul, out of this miserable world, in
the name of God the Father Almighty, who created thee; in the
name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who suffered for
thee; in the name of the Holy Ghost, who sanctified thee; in the
name of the angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, cherubim,
and seraphim; in the name of the patriarchs and prophets, of the
holy apostles, and evangelists, of the holy martyrs and
confessors, of the holy monks and hermits, of the holy virgins,
and of all the saints of God: let thy place be this day in peace,
and thy abode in holy Sion: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

God of clemency! God of goodness! O God, who according to the
multitude of thy mercies, forgivest the sins of such as repent,
and graciously remittest the guilt of their past offences,
mercifully regard this thy servant (_N_.) and grant him
(_her_) a full discharge from all his (_her_) sins, who
most earnestly begs it of thee. Renew, O merciful Father,
whatever is corrupt in him (_her_) through human frailty, or
by the snares of the enemy; make him (_her_) a true member
of thy church, and let him (_her_) partake of the fruit of
thy redemption.
{301}
Have compassion, O Lord, on his (_her_) sighs, have pity on
his (_her_) tears, and admit him (_her_) to the
sacrament of thy reconciliation, who has no hope but in thee:
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

I recommend thee, dear brother (_sister_,) to Almighty God,
and commit thee to his mercy, whose creature thou art; that
having paid the common debt, by surrendering thy soul, thou
mayest return to thy Maker, who formed thee out of the earth.
May, therefore, the noble company of angels meet thy soul at its
departure. May the court of the apostles receive thee. May the
triumphant army of glorious martyrs conduct thee. May the crowds
of joyful confessors encompass thee. May the choir of blessed
virgins go before thee; and may a happy rest be thy portion in
the company of the patriarchs. May Jesus Christ appear to thee
with a mild and cheerful countenance, and give thee a place among
those who are to be in his presence for ever. Mayest thou be a
stranger to all who are condemned to darkness, chastised with
flames, or punished with torments. May God command thy wicked
enemy, with all his evil spirits, to depart from thee. May the
infernal spirits tremble at thy approach encompassed by angels,
and retire into the horrid confusion of eternal night. May thy
God arise, and thy enemies be put to flight. May all who hate him
fly before his face. Let them vanish like smoke, or as wax before
the fire; so let sinners perish in the sight of God.
{302}
But as to the just, let them rejoice and be happy in his
presence. May all the ministers of hell be filled with confusion
and shame, and let no evil spirit dare to stop thy course to
heaven. May Christ Jesus, who was crucified for thee, be thy
deliverer. May he deliver thee from death, who for thy sake
vouchsafed to die. May Christ Jesus, the Son of the living God,
place thee in his garden of Paradise; and may he, the true
shepherd, own thee for one of his flock. May he absolve thee from
all thy sins, and place thee at his right hand in the inheritance
of his elect. O may it be thy happy lot to behold thy Redeemer
face to face; to be ever in his presence, in the beatific vision
of that eternal truth, which is the joy of the blessed. And thus
placed among those happy spirits, mayest thou be for ever filled
with heavenly sweetness. Amen.

Receive thy servant, O Lord, into that place where he
(_she_) may hope for salvation from thy mercy.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant from all dangers of
hell, and from all pain and tribulation.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Enoch and Elias from the common death of the world.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Noah in the flood.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Abraham from the midst of the Chaldeans.--R. Amen.

{303}

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst Job
from all his afflictions.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Isaac from being sacrificed by his father.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst Lot
from Sodom and the the flames of fire.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Moses from the hands of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Daniel from the lions' den.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst the
three children from the fiery furnace, and from the hands of that
unmerciful king.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Susannah from her false accusers.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
David from the hands of Saul and Goliah.--R. Amen.

Deliver, O Lord, the soul of thy servant, as thou deliveredst
Peter and Paul out of prison.--R. Amen.

And as thou deliveredst the blessed virgin and martyr, St.
Thecla, from most cruel torments, vouchsafe to deliver the soul
of this thy servant, and bring it to the participation of thy
heavenly joys.--R. Amen.

{304}

              Let Us Pray.

We commend to thee, O Lord, the soul of this thy servant; and
beseech thee, O Jesus Christ, Redeemer of the world, that as in
thy mercy to him (_her_) thou becamest man, so now thou
mayest vouchsafe to admit him (_her_) into the number of the
blessed. Remember, O Lord, that he (_she_) is thy creature,
not made by strange gods, but by thee, the only true and living
God; for there is no other God but thee, and none can work thy
wonders. Let his (_her_) soul find comfort in thy sight, and
remember not his (_her_) former sins, nor any of those
excesses which he (_she_) has fallen into through the
violence of passion and corruption. For although he (_she_)
hath sinned, yet he (_she_) has still retained a true faith
in thee, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; he (_she_) has had a
zeal for thy honour, and faithfully adores thee his (_her_)
God and Creator of all things.

Remember not, O Lord, the sins or ignorance of his (_her_)
youth; but according to thy great mercy be mindful of him
(_her_) in thy eternal glory. Let the heavens be opened to
him (_her_,) and the angels rejoice with him (_her_).
May St. Michael the archangel, the chief of the heavenly host,
conduct him (_her_). May blessed Peter, thy apostle, to whom
were given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, receive him
(_her_.)
{305}
May holy Paul thy apostle, and chosen vessel of election, assist
him (_her_.) May St. John, thy beloved disciple, to whom
were revealed the secrets of heaven, intercede for him
(_her_.) May all thy holy apostles, to whom was given the
power of binding and loosening, pray for him (_her_.) May
all the chosen servants and martyrs of God, who in this world
have suffered torments for thy sake, O Christ, intercede for him
(_her_,) that being delivered from this body of corruption,
he (_she_) may be admitted into the kingdom of heaven;
through the assistance and merits of thee, our Lord Jesus Christ,
who liveth and reigneth with the Father and the Holy Ghost, world
without end. Amen.



  [Should the sick person still continue in distress of agony, it
  may be proper for the assistants to continue on in prayer, saying
  Psalms xxi. cxviii.]


            Litany For A Happy Death;

  _Composed by a young Lady who was converted to the Catholic
  Faith, and afterwards died at eighteen, in the odour of
  sanctity._



O Lord Jesus, God of goodness, and Father of mercies, I approach
to thee with a contrite and humble heart: to thee I recommend the
last hour of my life, and the decision of my eternal doom.

{306}

When my feet, benumbed with death, shall admonish me that my
mortal course is drawing to an end,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When my eyes, dim and troubled at the approach of death, shall
fix themselves on thee, my last and only support,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When my face, pale and livid, shall inspire the beholders with
pity and dismay; when my hair, bathed in the sweat of death, and
stiffening on my head, shall forebode my approaching end,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When my ears, soon to be for ever shut to the discourse of men,
shall be opened to the irrevocable decree which is to cut me off
from the number of the living,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When my imagination, agitated by dreadful spectres, shall be sunk
in an abyss of anguish; when my soul, affrighted with the sight
of my iniquities, and the terrors of thy judgments, shall have to
fight against the angel of darkness, who will endeavour to
conceal thy mercies from my eyes, and to plunge me into despair,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._.

When my poor heart, yielding to the pressure, and exhausted by
its frequent struggles against the enemies of its salvation,
shall feel the pangs of death,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When the last tear, the forerunner of my dissolution, shall drop
from my eyes, receive it as a sacrifice of expiation for my sins;
grant that I may expire the victim of penance; and in that
dreadful moment,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

{307}

When my friends and relations, encircling my bed, shall shed the
tear of pity over me, and invoke thy clemency in my behalf,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When I shall have lost the use of my senses; when the world shall
have vanished from my sight; when my agonizing soul shall feel
the sorrows of death,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When my last sigh shall summon my soul to burst from the embraces
of the body, and to spring to thee on the wings of impatience and
desire,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When my soul, trembling on my lips, shall bid adieu to the world,
and leave my body lifeless, pale, and cold, receive this
separation as a homage which I willingly pay to thy divine
Majesty; and in that last moment of my mortal life,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._

When at length my soul, admitted to thy presence, shall first
behold the splendour of thy Majesty, reject me not, but receive
me into thy bosom, where I may for ever sing thy praises; and in
that moment, when eternity shall begin to me,
  _Merciful Jesus, have mercy on me._


              Let Us Pray.

O God, who hast doomed all men to die, but hast concealed from
all the hour of their death, grant that I may pass my days in the
practice of holiness and justice, and that I may deserve to quit
this world in the peace of a good conscience, and in the embraces
of thy love: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

{308}

    The Soul Being Now Departed,
    The Following Responsory is Said:

Come to his (_her_) assistance, all you saints of God; meet
him (_her_) all you angels of God; receive his (_her_)
soul, and present it now before its Lord. May Jesus Christ
receive thee, and the angels conduct thee to thy place of rest;
may they receive thy soul, and present it now before its Lord.

V. Eternal rest grant him (_her_,) O Lord.

R. And let perpetual light shine unto him (_her_.)

May the angels present him (_her_) now before the Lord.

Lord, have mercy on us.
Christ, have mercy on us.
Lord, have mercy on us.

Our Father, &c.

V. And lead us not into temptation;

R. But deliver us from evil.

V. Eternal rest grant him (_her_,) O Lord.

R. And let perpetual light shine unto him, (_her_.)

V. From the gates of hell;

R. Deliver his (_her_) soul, O Lord.

V. May he (_she_) rest in peace;

R. Amen.

V. O Lord, hear my prayer;

R. And let my cry come unto thee.

{309}

           Let Us Pray.

Unto thee, Lord, we commend the soul of thy servant (_N_.)
that being dead to this world, he (_she_) may live to thee;
and whatever sins he (_she_) has committed through human
frailty, we beseech thee, in thy goodness, mercifully to pardon:
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

  [Then, for a conclusion, may be added the following prayer for
  the assistants, which may be also said at the burial.]

Grant, O Lord, that while we here lament the departure of thy
servant, we may ever remember that we are most certainly to
follow him (_her_). Give us grace to prepare for that last
hour by a good life, that we may not be surprised by a sudden
death, but be ever watching when thou shalt call, that so with
the spouse we may enter into eternal glory: through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.


          A Prayer For All That Are Buried
	    In A Church Or Church-yard.

O God, by whose mercy the souls of all the faithful find rest,
grant to all thy servants, here or elsewhere, that have slept in
Christ, the full remission of all their sins; that being
acquitted as well from the guilt as the temporal punishment due
to them, they may be speedily admitted into thy heavenly kingdom,
and there rejoice with thee for all eternity: through, &c.

{310}

   Exequies, Or Sacred Rites Over The Tomb.

  [Solemnity performed after High Mass for the Dead, and which
  may be privately recited after the Office.]


                Responsory.

Libera me, Domine, de morte æterna, in die illa tremenda: *Quando
cœli movendi sunt, et terra: *Dum veneris judicare sæculum per
ignem.

V. Tremens factus sum ego, et timeo dum
discussio venerit, atque ventura ira.

  R. Quando cœli movendi sunt et terra.

V. Dies illa, dies iræ, calamitatis, et miseriæ:
dies magna, et amara valde.

  R. Dum veneris judicare sæculum per ignem.

Requiem æternam dona eis, Domine, et lux perpetua luceat eis.

  R. Libera me, Domine, de morte æterna, in die illa tremenda,
  quando cœli movendi sunt et terra, dum veneris judicare sæculum
  per ignem.

Kyrie, eleison.
  Christe, eleison.
  Kyrie, eleison.

Pater noster, [_secreto_.]

V. Et nos inducas in tentationem.

R. Sed libera nos a malo.

V. A porta inferi.

R. Erue, Domine, animam ejus [animas eorum.]

{311}

Exequies, Or Sacred Rites Over The Tomb.

  [Solemnity performed after High Mass for the Dead, and which
  may be privately recited after the Office.]

                   Responsory.

Deliver me, O Lord, from eternal death on that dreadful day:
*When the heavens and earth shall be moved: *Whilst thou wilt
come to judge the world by fire.

V. I am seized with trembling and dread, when I reflect on the
rigorous examination, and the vengeful wrath of that day.

  R. When the heavens and earth shall be moved.

V. That day shall be a day of wrath, calamity, and misery: the
great day of extreme bitterness and terror.

  R. Whilst thou wilt come to judge the world by fire.

Eternal rest grant to them, O Lord, and may
the perpetual light of glory shine upon them.

  R. Deliver me, O Lord, from eternal death on that dreadful day,
  when the heavens and earth shall be moved, whilst thou wilt
  come to judge the world by fire.

Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.

Our Father, [_in silence_.]

V. And lead us not into temptation.

R. But deliver us from evil.

V. From the gates of hell.

R. Deliver his soul, [their souls,] O Lord.

{312}

V. Requiescat (requiescant) in pace.

R. Amen.

V. Domine, exaudi, orationem meam.

R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

                     Oremus.

Prayer On The Commemoration Of All Souls.

Fidelium, Deus, omnium conditor et redemptor, animabus famulorum
famularumque tuarum remissionem cunctorum tribue peccatorum: ut
indulgentiam quam semper optaverunt, piis supplicationibus
consequantur. Qui vivis et regnas cum Deo Patre in unitate
Spiritus Sancti, Deus, per omnia sæcula sæculorum. Amen.

         Suffrages For The Souls Of The
         Faithful Departed In General.

                  Psalmus cxxix.

De profundis clamavi ad te, Domine: *Domine, exaudi vocem meum.

Fiant aures tuæ intendentes *in vocem deprecationis meæ.

Si iniquitatis observaveris, Domine: Domine, quis sustinebit?

Quia apud te propitiatio est: et propter legem tuam sustinui te,
Domine.

Sustinuat anima mea in verbo ejus: *speravit anima mea in Domino.

A custodia matutina usque ad noctem, *speret Israel in Domino.

Quia apud Dominum misericordia: et copiosa apud eum redemptio.

{313}

V. May he (they) rest in peace.

R. Amen.

V. O Lord, hear my prayer.

R. And let my cry come unto thee.

                   Let Us Pray.

Prayer On The Commemoration Of All Souls.

O God, the creator and redeemer of all the faithful, give to the
souls of thy servants departed, the full remission of all their
sins; that, through the help of pious supplications, they may
obtain the pardon they have always desired. Who livest and
reignest, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God, world
without end. Amen.


          Suffrages For The Souls Of The
           Faithful Departed In General.

                  Psalm cxxix.

From the depths I have cried out to thee,
*O Lord: Lord, hear my voice.

Let thy ears be attentive * to the voice of my petition.

If thou wilt consider our iniquities, O mighty Lord, * who shall
endure it?

But with thee there is merciful forgiveness: * and by reason of
thy law I have waited for thee, O Lord.

My soul hath relied on his word: *my soul hath hoped in the Lord.

From the morning watch, even until night, * let Israel hope in
the Lord.

Because with the Lord there is mercy: * and with him, plentiful
redemption.

{314}

Et ipse redimet Israel *ex omnibus iniquitatibus ejus.

Kyrie, eleison. Christe, eleison. Kyrie, eleison.

Pater noster, (_secreto_.)

V. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem,

  R. Sed libera nos a malo.

V. Requiem æternam dona eis, Domine;

  R. Et lux perpetua luceat eis.

V. A porta inferi,

  R. Erue, Domine, animas eorum.

V. Requiescant in pace.

  R. Amen.

V. Domine, exaudi orationem meam.

  R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


                     Oremus.

Fidelium, Deus, omnium conditor et redemptor, animabus famulorum
famularumque tuarum remissionem cunctorum tribue peccatorum; ut
indulgentiam quam semper optaverunt, piis supplicationibus
consequantur. Qui vivis et regnas in sæcula sæculorum. Amen.

V. Requiem æternam dona eis, Domine.

  R. Et lux perpetua luceat eis.

V. Requiescant in pace.

  R. Amen.

V. Anima ejus (animæ eorum) et animæ omnium fidelium defunctorum,
per misericordiam Dei, requiescant in pace.

  R. Amen.

{315}

And he shall redeem Israel * from all his iniquities.

Lord, have mercy on us.
Christ, have mercy on us.
Lord, have mercy on us.

Our Father, (_in silence_.)

V. And lead us not into temptation,

  R. But deliver us from evil.

V. Eternal rest grant to them, O Lord;

  R. And may the perpetual light of glory shine upon them.

V. From the gates of hell,

  R. Deliver their souls, O Lord.

V. May they rest in peace.

  R. Amen.

V. O Lord, hear my prayer.

  R. And let my cry come to thee.


                   Let Us Pray.

O God, the creator and redeemer of all the faithful, give to the
souls of thy servants departed, the full remission of all their
sins: that through the help of pious supplications, they may
obtain the pardon they have always desired. Who livest and
reignest world without end. Amen.

V. Eternal rest grant to them, O Lord.

  R. And may the perpetual light of glory shine upon them.

V. May they rest in peace.

  R. Amen.

V. May his soul (their souls), and may the souls of all the
faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in peace.

  R. Amen.

{316}

               Litany For The Dead.


"It is a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the dead, that
they may be loosed from their sins."
  2 Maccabees xii. 46.


Lord, have mercy on us.
Christ, have mercy on us.
Lord, have mercy on us.

Jesus, receive our prayers.
Lord Jesus, grant our petitions.

O God the Father, Creator of the world,
  _Have mercy on the souls of the faithful departed._

O God the Son, Redeemer of mankind,
  _Deliver the souls of the faithful departed._

O God the Holy Ghost, perfecter of the elect,
  _Accomplish the bliss of the faithful departed._

Blessed Virgin Mary, who, by the special privilege of grace, was
triumphantly assumed into the kingdom of thy Son,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed angels, who, ordering aright the first act of your will,
were fixed forthwith in unchangeable happiness,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed patriarchs, who were filled with joy when the Desired of
Nations put an end to your captivity,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed prophets, who after patiently awaiting the arrival of the
Messiah, were at length consoled by a visit from him in person,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

{317}

Blessed saints, who at the glorious resurrection of our Saviour,
were translated from Limbo to the visible presence of God,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed apostles, who at the last day shall sit to judge the
twelve tribes of Israel,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed disciples of our Lord, who followed his steps in the
narrow paths to perfection,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed martyrs, who passed through the sea of your own blood,
entering immediately into the land of promise,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed confessors, who despised the vanity of the earth, and
placed your affections on the joys of heaven,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Blessed virgins, who, with your lighted lamps, awaited the coming
of the heavenly spouse,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

O holy saints, who, being freed from all irregular attachment to
creatures, were perfectly fitted for an immediate union with your
Creator,
  _Pray for the souls of the faithful departed._

Be merciful, O Lord, and pardon their sins.

Be merciful, O Lord, and hear their prayers.

From the shades of death, where the light of thy countenance
shineth not,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

From the evils to which immortification in this world must expose
them in the other,
   _Deliver them, O Lord._

From thy displeasure, provoked by negligence and ingratitude,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

From the pains of purgatory, so justly inflicted upon unexpiated
sins,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

{318}

From the torments of purgatory, incomparably greater than the
bitterest anguish of this life,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

By the multitude of thy mercies, ever compassionate to human
frailties,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

By the virtue of thy cross, whereon thou reconciledst the world
to thy Father,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

By thy victorious descent into hell, to break the chains of
death,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

By thy glorious resurrection from the tomb, to open the kingdom
of heaven,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

By thy triumphant ascension into heaven, to lead captivity
captive,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

By thy dread coming to judge the world,
  _Deliver them, O Lord._

We sinners,
  _Beseech thee to hear us._

That it please thee to hasten the day when thy faithful shall be
delivered from the mansions of sorrow,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

That it please thee to shorten the time of their expiation, and
to admit them speedily into thy heavenly sanctuary,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

That it please thee through the prayers and good works performed
in thy church, to receive them into thy eternal tabernacles,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

That it please thee to accept, in atonement for their sins, the
infinite value of thy unbloody sacrifice,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

That the blessed view of Jesus may comfort them, and his unfading
glory shine upon them,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

{319}

That the whole triumphant church may soon celebrate their
deliverance and the choir of angels sing new hymns of joy, on
their neverending happiness,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

That we ourselves may share in their triumph, and unite with all
the citizens of heaven in eternal alleluias,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

Son of God,
  _We Beseech thee to hear us._

Lamb of God, who shalt come with glory to judge the living and
the dead,
  _Give rest to the souls of the faithful departed_.

Lamb of God, at whose presence the heavens and the earth shall be
moved,
  _Give rest to the souls of the faithful departed_.

Lamb of God, in whose book of life the names of thy elect are
inscribed,
  _Give rest to the souls of the faithful departed_.


                 The Antiphon.

Deliver us, O Lord, from eternal death, in that tremendous day,
when the heavens and the earth shall be moved; whilst thou shalt
come to judge the world by fire. We tremble and are sore afraid
at the discussion which will take place, and at thy future wrath;
when the heavens and the earth shall be moved; when thou shalt
come to judge the world by fire.

That day is a day of wrath, of calamity, and of misery; a great
and a most bitter day; when thou shalt come to judge the world by
fire.

Give them, O Lord, eternal rest, and let perpetual light shine
upon them. Amen.

{320}

                   Let Us Pray.

O God, the creator and redeemer of all the faithful, grant to the
souls of thy servants departed, the remission of all their sins,
that by means of pious supplications, they may obtain the pardon
which they have ever earnestly desired: who livest and reignest,
&c. Amen.


              A Prayer Upon The Day
         Of A Person's Decease Or Burial.

O Lord, we commend unto thy infinite clemency, the souls of thy
servants lately deceased: pardon them, we beseech thee, in the
multitude of thy mercies, the sins which they have committed
through human frailty, and grant them eternal life in thy kingdom
of bliss. Amen.


                 Another Prayer.

O God, whose property it is always to have mercy, and to spare,
we humbly present our prayers to thee in behalf of the soul of
thy servant _N_. which thou hast called out of this world,
beseeching thee not to deliver into the hands of the enemy, nor
forget it for ever; but command it to be received by the holy
angels, and to be carried into paradise; that as it believed and
hoped in thee, it may be delivered from the pains of hell, and
inherit life everlasting; through Christ our Lord. Amen.

{321}

              Vespers For Sundays.


Our Father. Hail Mary. (_In silence_.)

                  +

V. Deus, in adjutorium meum intende.

    V. O God, come to my assistance.

R. Domine, ad adjuvandum me festina.

    R. O Lord, make haste to help me.

Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto.

    Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
    Ghost.

  Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et semper, et in sæcula
  sæculorum. Amen. Alleluia.

    As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world
    without end. Amen. Alleluiah.


  From Saturday before Septuagesaima Sunday, till Saturday in
  Holy Week, instead of _Alleluia_, is said,

Laus tibi, Domine, Rex eternæ gloriæ.

    Praise be to thee, O Lord, King of eternal glory.


N. B.--In Paschal time all the Psalms are said under this only.
Anthem. _Alleluia_.

_Ant_. Dixit Dominus.

    _Ant_. The Lord said.

_Ant_. Alleluia.

    _Ant_. Alleluiah.



                   Psalm CIX.


_Christ's Exaltation and everlasting Priesthood._


Dixit Dominus Domino meo: *sede a dextris meis.

  The Lord said unto my Lord, sit on my right hand.

Donec ponam inimicos tuos: *scabellum pedum tuorum.

  Until I make thy enemies the footstool of thy feet.

Virgam virtutis tuæ emittet Dominus ex Sion: *Dominare in medio
inimicorum tuorum.

  The Lord will send the sceptre of thy power out of Sion: rule
  thou in the midst of thy enemies.

Tecum principium in die virtutis tuæ, in splendoribus sanctorum:
*ex utero ante luciferum genui te.

  Dominion shall be with thee in the day of thy power in the
  brightness of the saints: from the womb before the day star I
  begat thee.

{322}

Juravit Dominus, et non pœnitebit eum: *Tu es sacerdos in æternam
secundum ordinem Melchisedech.

  The Lord swore, and it shall not repent him: Thou art a priest
  for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech.

Dominus a dextris tuis: *confregit in die iræ suæ reges.

  The Lord at thy right hand hath broken kings in the day of his
  wrath.

Judicabit in nationibus, implebit ruinas: *conquassabit capita in
terra multorum.

  He shall judge among nations, he shall fill ruins: he shall
  crush the heads in the land of many.

De torrente in via bibet: *propterea exaltabit caput.

  He shall drink of the torrent in the way; therefore shall he
  lift up the head.

Gloria Patri, &c.

  Glory be to the Father, &c.

_Ant_. Dixit Dominus.

  _Ant_. The Lord said unto my Lord: sit thou on my right.

_Ant_. Fidelia.

  _Ant_. All his commandments.


                   Psalm. CX.

  _God is to be praised for his graces and benefits to his
  Church._

Confitebor tibi, Domine, in toto corde meo: *in concilio
justorum, et congregatione.

  I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: in the council
  of the just, and in the congregation.

Magna opera Domini: *exquisita in omnes voluntates ejus.

  Great are the works of the Lord: sought out according to all
  his wills.

Confessio et magnificentia opus ejus: *et justitia ejus manet in
sæculum sæculi.

  His work is praise and magnificence: and his justice continueth
  for ever and ever.

Memoriam fecit mirabilium suorum, misericors et miserator
Dominus: *escam dedit timentibus se.

  He hath made a remembrance of his wonderful works, being a
  merciful and gracious Lord: he hath given food to them that
  fear him.

{323}

Memor erit in sæculum testamenti sui; *virtutem operum suorum
annuntiabit populo suo.

  He will be mindful for ever of his covenant: he will shew forth
  to his people the power of his works.

Ut det illis hæreditatem gentium: *opera manuum ejus veritas et
judicium.

  That he may give them the inheritance of the Gentiles: the
  works of his hands are truth and judgment.

Fidelia omnia mandata ejus, confirmata in sæculum sæculi: *facta
in veritate et equitate.

  All his commandments are faithful: confirmed for ever and ever,
  made in truth and equity.

Redemptionem misit populo suo: *mandavit in æternum testamentum
suum.

  He hath sent redemption to his people: he hath commanded his
  covenant for ever.

Sanctum et terribile nomen ejus: *initium sapientiæ timor Domini.

  Holy and terrible is his name: the fear of the Lord is the
  beginning of wisdom.

Intellectus bonus omnibus facientibus eum *laudatio ejus manet in
sæculum sæculi.

  A good understanding to all that do it: his praise continued
  for ever and ever.

Gloria Patri, &c.

  Glory, &c.

_Ant_. Fidelia.

  _Ant_. All his commandments are faithful: confirmed for
  ever and ever.

_Ant_. In mandatis.

  _Ant_. In his commandments.


                    Psalm CXI.

           _The good man is happy._


Beatus vir, qui timet Dominum: *in mandatis ejus volet nimis.

  Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord: he shall delight
  exceedingly in his commandments.

Potens in terra erit semen ejus: *generatio rectorum benedicetur.

  His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generations of the
  righteous shall be blessed.

{324}

Gloria et divitiæ in domo ejus: *et justitia ejus manet in
sæculum sæculi.

  Glory and wealth shall be in his house; and his justice
  remaineth for ever and ever.

Exortum est in tenebris lumen rectis: *misericors, et miserator
et justus.

  To the righteous a light is risen up in darkness; he is
  merciful, and compassionate and just.

Jucundus homo qui miseretur et commodat: disponet sermones suos
in judicio: *quia in æternum non commovebitur.

  Acceptable is the man that showeth mercy and lendeth; he shall
  order his words with judgment; because he shall not be moved
  for ever.

In memoria æterna erit justus: *ab auditione mala non timebit.

  The just shall be in everlasting remembrance: he shall not fear
  the evil hearing.

Paratum cor ejus sperare in Domino, confirmatum est cor ejus:
*non commovebitur, donec despiciat inimicos suos.

  His heart is ready to hope in the Lord: his heart is
  strengthened, he shall not be moved, until he look over his
  enemies.

Dispersit, dedit pauperibus: justitia ejus manet in sæculum
sæculi: *cornu ejus exaltabitur in gloria.

  He hath distributed, he hath given to the poor: his justice
  remaineth for ever and ever, his horn shall be exalted in
  glory.

Peccator videbit et irascetur, dentibus suis fremet, et tabescet:
*desiderium peceatorum peribit.

  The wicked shall see and shall be angry, he shall gnash with
  his teeth and pine away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.

Gloria Patri, &c.

  Glory, &c.

_Ant_. In madatis ejus cupit nimis.

  _Ant_. In his commandments he has great delight.

_Ant_. Sit nomen Domini.

  _Ant_. Let the name of the Lord.


                   Psalm CXII.

  _God is to be praised for his regard to the poor and
  humble._


Laudate pueri Dominum: *laudate nomen Domini.

  Praise the Lord, ye children: praise ye the name of the Lord.

{325}

Sit nomen Domini benedictum: *ex hoc nunc et usque in sæculum.

  Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth now and for
  ever.

A solis ortu usque ad occasum: *laudabile nomen Domini.

  From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the
  name of the Lord is worthy of praise.

Excelsus super omnes gentes Dominus: *et super cœlos gloria ejus.

  The Lord is high above all nations: and his glory above the
  heavens.

Quis sicut Dominus Deus noster, qui in altis habitat: *et humilia
respicit in cœlo et in terra?

  Who is as the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high: and looketh
  down on the low things in heaven and in earth?

Suscitans a terra inopem: *et de steroore erigens pauperem.

  Raising up the needy from the earth, and lifting up the poor
  out of the dunghill:

Ut collocet eum cum principibus: *cum principibus populi sui.

  That he may place them with princes, with the princes of his
  people.

Qui habitare facit sterilem in domo: *matrem filiorum lætantem.

  Who maketh a barren woman to dwell in a house, the joyful
  mother of children.

Gloria Patri, &c.

  Glory, &c.

_Ant_. Sit nomen Domini.

  _Ant_. Let the name of the Lord be blessed for ever.

_Ant_. Nos qui vivimus.

  _Ant_. We that live.


                   Psalm CXVI.

Laudate Dominum omnes gentes: *laudate eum omnes populi.

  O praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him all ye people.

Quoniam confirmata est super nos misericordia ejus: *et Veritas
Domini manet in æternum.

  For his mercy is confirmed upon us: and the truth of Lord
  remaineth for ever.

Gloria Patri, &c.

Glory be to the Father, &c.

_Ant_. Nos qui vivimus benedicimus Domino.

  _Ant_. We that live bless our Lord.


  _In Paschal time, Ant_.
  Alleluiah, Alleluiah, Alleluiah.

{326}

   _The Little Chapter_.--2 Cor. 1.

Benedictus Deus, et Pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, Pater
misericordiarum, et Deus totius consolationis, qui consolatur nos
in omni tribulatione nostra.

  Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
  Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who comforts us in
  all our tribulation.

R. Deo Gratias.

  R. Thanks be to God.


        _The Hymn Lucis Creator._

  Lucis Creator optime,
  Lucem dierum proferens,
  Primordiis lucis novæ,
  Mundi parans originem.

    Creator of the radiant light.
    Fountain of bliss, essential sight.
    Emitting splendour's orient beam.
    The world's creation to proclaim.

  Qui mane junctum vesperi.
  Diem vocari præcipis,
  Illabitur Tetrum Chaos;
  Audi preces cum fletibus.

    Who, with the morn's enliv'ning ray,
    Dispell'st the shades and call'st the day;
    Approaching night over-spreads the spheres;
    Now gracious hear our sighs and tears.

  Ne mens gravata crimine
  Vitæ sit exul munere;
  Dum nil perenne cogitat,
  Seseque culpis illigat.

    Distain'd with guilt and foul offence,
    Let not a sudden summons hence,
    Present us at thy awful seat,
    Victims of fleeting vain deceit.

  Cœleste pulset ostium;
  Vitale tollat præmium;
  Vitemus omne noxium;
  Purgemus omne pessimum.

    But rather while at mercy's door,
    Contrite, our treasons we deplore,
    Admit thy suppliants; grant us peace.
    That triumph of thy saving grace.

  Præsta, Pater piissime;
  Patrique compar, Unice;
  Cum Spiritu Paracleto,
  Regnans per omne sæculum.
  Amen.

    Eternal Father, lend thine ear;
    Co-eternal Son, receive our prayer;
    O Holy Ghost, we cry to thee,
    God! three in one eternally.
    Amen.

{327}

V. Dirigatur, Domine, oratio mea.

  V. Let my prayer, like incense,

R. Sicut incensum in conspectu tuo.

  R. Ascend to thee, O Lord.


  _The Song of the Blessed Virgin Mary_.--Luke, i.

Magnificat *anima mea Dominum:

 My soul doth magnify the Lord:

Et exultavit spiritus meus *in Deo salutari meo.

  And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

Quia respexit humilitatem ancillæ suæ: *ecce enim ex hoc beatam
me dicent omnes generationes.

  Because he hath regarded the humility of his handmaid; for
  behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Quia fecit mihi magna, qui potens est; *et sanctum nomen ejus.

  For he that is mighty, hath done great things to me, and holy
  is his name.

Et misericordia ejus a progenie in progenies, *timentibus eum.

  And his mercy is from generation to generation, to them that
  fear him.

Fecit potentiam in brachio suo; *dispersit superbos mente cordis
sui.

  He hath showed might in his arm; he hath scattered the proud in
  the conceit of their hearts.

Deposuit potentes de sede; *et exaltavit humiles.

  He hath put down the mighty from their seat, and hath exalted
  the humble.

Esurientes implevit bonis; *et divites dimissit inanes.

  He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he
  hath sent away empty.

Suscepit Israel puerum suum, *recordatus misericordiæ suæ.

  He hath received Israel his servant, being mindful of his
  mercy.

Sicut locutus est ad patres nostros: *Abraham et semini ejus in
sæcula.

  As he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and to his seed for
  ever.

Gloria Patri, &c.

  Glory, &c.


{328}


         The Litany Of The Blessed Virgin.

                   In Latin.


Kyrie, eleison.
Christe, eleison.
Kyrie, eleison.
Christe, audi nos.
Christe, exaudi nos.

Pater de cœlis Deus,
  _miserere nobis._

Fili redemptor mundi Deus,
  _miserere nobis._

Spiritus Sancte Deus,
  _miserere nobis._

Sancta Trinitas unus Deus,
  _miserere nobis._

Sancta Maria,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Sancta Dei Genitrix,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Sancta Virgo virginum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater Christi,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater Divinæ gratis,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater purissima,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater castissima,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater inviolata,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater intemerata,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater amabilis,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater admirabilis,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater Creatoris,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Mater Salvatoris,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Virgo prudentissima,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Virgo veneranda,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Virgo prædicanda,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Virgo potens,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Virgo clemens,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Virgo fidelis,
  _Ora pro nobis._

{329}

Speculum justitiæ,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Sedes sapientiæ,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Causa nostræ lætitiæ,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Vas spirituale,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Vas honorabile,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Vas insigne devotionis,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Rosa mystica,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Turris Davidica,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Turris eburnea,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Domus aurea,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Fœderis arca,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Janua cœli,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Stella matutina,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Salis infirmorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Refugium peccatorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Consolatrix affiictorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Auxilium Christianorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Angelorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Patriarcharum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Prophetarum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Apostolorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Martyrum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Confessorum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Virginum,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Regina Sanctorum Omnium,
  _Ora pro nobis._

Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi,
  _Parce nobis, Domine._

Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi,
  _Exaudi nos, Domine._

Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi,
  _Miserere nobis._

V. Ora pro nobis, sancta Dei genitrix.

  R. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

{330}

            Method Of Serving At Mass.


  [The Clerk, kneeling at the left side of the Priest, should
  answer as follows:]

P. + In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Introibo ad altare Dei.

C. Ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem meam.

P. Judica me, Deus, et discerne causam meam de gente non sancta:
ab nomine iniquo et doloso erue me.

C. Quia tu es, Deus, fortitudo mea: quare me repulisti, et quare
tristis incedo dum affligit me inimicus.

P. Emitte lucem tuam et veritatem tuam: ipsa me deduxerunt et
adduxerunt in montem: sanctum tuum, et in tabernacula tua.

C. Et introibo ad altare Dei: ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem
meam.

P. Confitebor tibi in cithara, Deus, Deus meus: quare tristis es
anima mea, et quare conturbas me?

C. Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi, salutare vultus
mei, et Deus meus.

P. Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto;

C. Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et semper, et in sæcula
sæculorum. Amen.

P. Introibo ad altare Dei.

C. Ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem meam.

P. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

C. Qui fecit cœlum et terram.

{331}

P. Confiteor Deo, &c.

  [Bow your head when the priest begins the Confiteor, and
  continue bent till the _Dominus Vobiscum._]

C. Misereatur tui omnipotent Deus, et dimissis peccatis tuis,
perducat te ad vitam æternam.

P. Amen.

C. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatæ Mariæ semper Virgini, beato
Michaeli Archangelo, beato Joanni Baptistæ, sanctis apostolis
Petro et Paulo, omnibus Sanctis, et tibi pater, (_here turn
your head towards the priest, and then go on_,) quia peccavi
nimis cogitatione, verbo, et opere, (_striking your breast
thrice, say_,) mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa: ideo
precor beatam Mariam semper Virginem, beatum Michaelem
Archangelum, beatum Joannem Baptistam, sanctos apostolos Petrum
et Paulum, omnes sanctos, et te pater, (_here turn again
towards the priest_,) orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.

P. Misereatur vestri, &c.

C. Amen.

P. Indulgentiam, &c.

C. Amen.

P. Deus tu conversus vivificabis nos.

C. Et plebs tua lætabitur in te.

P. Ostende nobis, Domine, misericordiam tuam.

C. Et salutare tuum da nobis.

P. Domine, exaudi orationem meam.

C. Et clamor mens ad te veniat.

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

{332}

P. Kyrie eleison.

C. Kyrie eleison.

P. Kyrie eleison.

C. Christe eleison.

P. Christe eleison.

C. Christe eleison.

P. Kyrie eleison.

C. Kyrie eleison.

P. Kyrie eleison.

P. Dominus vobiscum: _or_, Flectamus genua.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo: _or_, Levate.

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

C. Amen.

  [At the end of the Epistle say, _Deo gratias_, and after
  the Gradual and Alleluia, or Tract, remove the took to the
  gospel side of the altar, and return to the epistle side--make
  a low reverence as you pass the middle of the altar, then stand
  up whilst the gospel is read,]

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

P. Sequentia [_or_ initium] sancti Evangelii, &c.


  [Here make the sign of the cross--1st, upon your forehead; 2nd,
  upon your mouth; 3rd, upon your breast; and say, _Gloria tibi
  Domine._ At the end of the gospel say,]

C. Laus tibi, Christe.

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  [Going to the middle of the altar, kneel and make a reverence,
  then proceed to prepare the wine and water; present them to the
  priest, making a reverence; afterwards pour water on his
  fingers, present him with a towel, and return to your place at
  the epistle side of the altar.]

P. Orate fratres, &c.

C. Suscipiat Dominus sacrificium de manibus tuis ad laudem et
gloriam nominis sui, ad utilitatem quoque nostram, totiusque
ecclesiæ suæ sanctæ.

{333}

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

C. Amen.

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

P. Sursum corda.

C. Habemns ad Dominum.

P. Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro.

C. Dignum et justum est.

  [When the priest says, _Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, &c._
  ring the bell each time he pronounces it. When he spreads his
  hands over the chalice, ring the bell, then proceed to the
  centre of the altar, where kneeling ring the bell with your
  right, and hold up the vestment with your left hand, during the
  elevation. Then return to your former place, and as often as
  you pass by the blessed sacrament, adore on your knees.]

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

C. Amen.

P. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem.

C. Sed libera nos a malo.

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

C. Amen.

P. Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  [Each time the priest says, _Domine non sum dignus_, ring
  the bell. When he has received the chalice, serve him with wine
  only; on his presenting the chalice again, serve him with wine
  and water. Remove the book to the epistle side of the altar,
  and retire to your place on the gospel side.]

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

C. Amen.

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

{334}

P. Ite, missa est; _or_, Benedicamus Domino.

C. Deo gratias.

_Note_.--In Mass for the Dead, the priest says,

P. Requiescant in pace.

C. Amen.

  [Remove the book, if left open; kneel before the centre of the
  altar, and receive the priest's blessing.]

P. Pater, et Filius, et Spiritus Sanctus.

C. Amen. [_Then rise_.]

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

P. Initium [Sequentia] sancti Evangelii, &c.

C. Gloria tibi Domine.

At the end of the Gospel, say,

C. Deo gratias.


              Psalm cxxix.

P. De profundis clamavi ad te Domine: Domine exaudi vocem meam.

C. Fiant aures tuæ intendentes in vocem deprecationis meæ.

P. Si iniquitates observaveris Domine: Domine, quis sustinebit?

C. Quia apud te propitiatio est: et propter legem tuam sustinui
te Domine.

P. Sustinuit anima mea in verbo ejus: speravit anima mea in
Domino.

C. A custodia matutina usque ad noctem: speret Israel in Domino.

P. Quia apud Dominum misericordia: et copiosa apud eum redemptio.

{335}

C. Et ipse redimet Israel ex omnibus iniquitatibus ejus.

P. Requiem æternum dona eis Domine.

C. Et lux perpetua luceat eis.

P. A porta inferi.

C. Erue, Domine, animas eorum.

P. Requiescant in pace.

C. Amen.

P. Domine exaudi orationem meam.

C. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

P. Dominus vobiscum.

C. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  [At the end of the Prayer, say, _Amen_].

P. Requiem æternam dona eis Domine.

C. Et lux perpetua luceat eis.

P. Requiescant in pace.

C. Amen.


      End Of The First Part Of Catholic Piety.

{336}

                Supplement To The

            Manual Of Catholic Piety.


          On The Sacrifice Of The Mass
        And The Use Of The Latin Liturgy.


  From the beginning of the world, the servants of God, were
  always accustomed to offer sacrifice to him, by way of
  acknowledging his sovereignty, and paying their homage to him.
  In the law of nature, and in the law of Moses, there was a
  great variety of sacrifices; some _bloody_, others
  _unbloody_; some were called _Holocausts_, or
  Whole-burnt Offerings; others, _Sin Offerings;_ others,
  _Offerings of Thanksgiving;_ others, _Pacific_ or
  _Peace Offerings_. All these sacrifices of the law of
  nature and the law of Moses, were of themselves but _weak and
  feeble elements_, and figures of the great sacrifice of
  Jesus Christ, offered afterwards on the altar of the cross for
  the sins of the whole world.

  It was to renew the memory of this great sacrifice of the
  cross, and to apply the fruits of it to our souls, that Christ
  our Lord instituted the Eucharist and commemorative sacrifice
  of the Mass; for as the ancient sacrifices were required to
  represent the sacrifice of the cross, and to prefigure the
  death of Christ, then to come; so, in like manner, a
  commemorative sacrifice was required in the new law, to be a
  standing memorial of the sacrifice of the cross, and to
  represent the death of Christ, already past. This is the solemn
  liturgy of the Catholic Church, and the pure offering that is
  made to God in every place among the Gentiles, according to the
  prophecy of Malachy, chap. i. ver. 10, 11. By it Christ is a
  _priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech_,
  (Psalm 109,) whose sacrifice was bread and wine. (Gen. 15.) It
  is the same in substance with the sacrifice of the cross,
  because both the victim offered, and the priest, or
  _principal offerer,_ is the same Jesus Christ.
{337}
  The difference is only in the manner of offering: in the
  sacrifice of the cross, Christ offered himself in a bloody
  manner, and actually died; in the sacrifice of the Mass, he
  offers himself on our altars in an unbloody manner, by the
  ministry of the priests of his church, under appearances that
  mystically represent and show forth his death.

  The sacrifice of the Mass is still celebrated in the ancient
  language which was universally used throughout the Roman
  empire, and in which the liturgy and public offices of the
  church were performed in all the western parts of Europe, when
  the Christian religion was first published to the world. All
  sermons, exhortations, and instructions which regard the
  faithful, are regularly delivered to them in the vulgar or
  maternal language which they speak and understand; but it is
  deemed an expedient point of discipline, to retain the same
  ancient, fixed, and unchangeable language, in the celebration
  of the divine mysteries, and in the solemn prayers which are
  addressed immediately to God, and which regard the office of
  the clergy. The chief reasons which induce the Catholic Church
  to make choice of the Latin, in preference to any of the mixed
  languages that sprung from it after the dismemberment of the
  Roman empire, and are now in use in the European nations, are
  the following:

  1st--She is the church of all ages, and of all nations; and
  therefore, to show her antiquity and catholicity, as well as
  her aversion to novelty and changes in religious matters, she
  still retains the same ancient and universal language which the
  saints have used for so many ages from the apostles' days, and
  which is fixed and unchangeable, taught every where in public
  schools, generally learned by persons of all conditions, and
  the best known and most universally understood in the western
  parts of the world.

  2dly--In order to preserve the purity of her faith, and a
  greater conformity in her public worship in all countries, and
  to avoid the various alterations and corruptions which the
  living languages, spoken in different places, are liable to in
  every century, the church wisely judges, that as there is but
  one true faith, there should be but one common language for all
  the faithful, spread over the different nations of the world,
  to commune with each other in the profession of one and the
  same faith, and in the exercise of the same religious duties.

{338}

  3rdly--Another good effect and advantage that arises from this
  point of ecclesiastical discipline, is, that the same priest
  can perform the public church offices in all places where he
  travels; and a Catholic is never at a loss to join with those
  of his own religion, and assist at the public worship of God,
  whithersoever he may have occasion to go, since he meets with
  the same Mass and Liturgy, in the same words, abroad, which he
  was accustomed to near at home; whereas, if the divine service
  was to be performed in the maternal language of every country,
  and to be translated into as many different tongues as the
  ignorant people understand and speak in the different
  provinces, there would be nothing but a Babel of confusion, and
  a man of one country would be at a loss to serve God on the
  Lord's day in another country.

  As to any inconvenience that may seem to attend this
  ecclesiastical discipline, it is no way material, especially
  when compared to the great advantages that arise from it; nor
  does it affect the substance of religion; neither is it a
  prejudice to the illiterate, who do not understand the Latin;
  for though they may not perhaps understand the particular form
  of prayers, which it is only the priest's office to offer to
  God, for and in the name of the congregation, yet they know
  them at least as to the substance, and may find the meaning of
  every thing fully explained in their manuals. They are taught
  from their childhood to accompany the officiating priest
  through every part of his function, with proper and suitable
  prayers, and are frequently instructed in the nature, the
  benefit, and the ends for which the Mass is offered, and in the
  manner of assisting thereat with attention and devotion, which
  is sufficient to concur in and partake of the sacrifice, though
  the people should neither hear nor cite the same prayers with
  the priest.

  The very seeing of the priest was more than God was pleased to
  require in the old law; for we read, (St. Luke, 1. 10,) _that
  the whole multitude of the people were praying without_, when
  Zacharias went into the temple to burn incense; and (Levit.
  xvi. 17.) it was expressly ordered, that there should be no man
  in the tabernacle, or temple, when the high-priest went with
  the blood of the victims into the sanctuary to make atonement,
  which is a clear proof that it was not necessary for the people
  to hear and understand the particular form of prayers, that the
  priest offered to God for them in the sacrifices at which they
  assisted.
{339}
  Moreover, we find that after the Babylonian captivity, nay,
  even in our Saviour's time, the public service of the Jewish
  synagogue was performed in the old Hebrew language, though it
  was not understood by the common people, who only spoke the
  Syriac, (Nah. viii. 13,) into which the scriptures were not
  then translated from the Hebrew.

  But does not the sacred scripture condemn this practice? No:
  far from condemning, it authorises it, as appears from what has
  been already said. As to the text of St. Paul, (1 Cor. xiv.)
  the apostle does not speak one word, in that whole chapter, of
  the liturgy of the church, which at Corinth was in Greek, and
  consequently in a known language. He treats of the miraculous
  gift of speaking all tongues, which was communicated by the
  Holy Ghost to the first believers; and he cautions the
  Corinthians against all confusion and disorder in the use of
  this miraculous gift at their pious meetings and assemblies, by
  directing them, that if they spoke with tongues, it should be
  done by two, or at most by three, and that one should interpret
  the meaning of the words. In short, the apostle only blames the
  abuse of the gifts of tongues, which some of the Corinthians
  were guilty of, by affecting, out of ostentation, to make
  extemporary prayers, and to preach and exhort, at the same
  time, all or any of them together, in tongues utterly unknown,
  which, for want of an interpreter, could be of no edification
  to the rest of the faithful. But when it is done in proper
  circumstances, without confusion, and when the sense of the
  words is expounded by an interpreter, the apostle does not
  reprehend, but permits and orders the speaking in tongues that
  are not commonly understood, as appears from the 5th and 29th
  verses. Now the faithful have the public liturgy and church
  offices interpreted in their ordinary prayer books; and their
  pastors are commanded by the Council of Trent, (Sess. 22. chap.
  8,) to explain to them the mysteries contained in the Mass, and
  to teach them to accompany the priest with suitable prayers and
  devotion adapted to every part of it.

{340}

          The Ordinary Of The Holy Mass.

                     Part I.


  The Preparation Of The Offerers, By Acts Of
  Humility, Praise, Faith, Etc.


  The Priest beginning at the foot of the Altar, says,


In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

  In the name of the Father, &c. Amen.

_Ant_. Introibo ad altare Dei.

  _Ant_. I will go unto the altar of God.

R. Ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem meam.

  R. To God, who rejoiceth my youth.



  The following Psalm (42nd) is omitted in Passion time, and in
  Masses for the Dead.


Judica me, Deus, et discerne causam meam de gente non sancta: ab
homine iniquo et doloso erne me.

  Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause from the nation that
  is not holy: from the unjust and deceitful man deliver me.

R. Quia tu es, Deus, fortitudo mea, quare me repulisti? et quare
tristis incedo, dum affligit me inimicus?

  R. Since thou, O God, art my strength, why hast thou cast me
  off? and why do I go sorrowful, while the enemy afflicteth me?

{341}

P. Emitte lucem tuam et veritatem tuam: ipsa me deduxenmt et
adduxenint in montem sanctum tuum, et in tabernacula tua.

  P. Send forth thy light and thy truth: they have conducted and
  brought me to thy holy mount, and into thy tabernacles.

R. Et introibo ad altare Dei: ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem me
am.

  R. And I will go unto the altar of God; to God who rejoiceth my
  youth.

P. Confitebor tibi in cithara, Deus, Deus, meus: quare tristis
es, anima mea; et quare conturbas me?

  P. I will praise thee on the harp, O God, my God: why art thou
  sorrowful, O my soul; and why dost thou disturb me?

R. Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi: salutare vultus
mei, et Deus meus.

  R. Hope in God, for I will yet praise him: the salvation of my
  countenance, and my God.

P. Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto:

  P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, &c.

R. Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et semper, et in sæcula
sæculorum. Amen.

  R. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world
  without end. Amen.

P. Introibo ad altare Dei.

  P. I will go unto the altar of God.

R. Ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem meam.

  R. To God who rejoiceth my youth.

P. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

  P. Our help is in the name of the Lord.

R. Qui fecit cœlum et terrain.

 R. Who made heaven and earth.

{342}

P. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, &c.

  P. I confess to almighty God, &c.

R. Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, et dimissis peccatis tuis,
perducat te ad vitam æternam.

  R. May almighty God be merciful to thee, and forgiving thee thy
  sins, bring thee to life everlasting.

P. Amen.

  P. Amen.

R. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatæ Mariæ, semper virgine, beato
Michaeli archangelo, beato Joanni baptistæ, Sanctis apostolis
Petro et Paulo, omnibus Sanctis, et tibi, pater, quia peccavi
nimis cogitatione, verbo, et opere: _mea culpa, mea culpa, mea
maxima culpa_. Ideo precor beatam Mariam semper virginem,
beatum Michaelem archangelum, beatum Joannem baptistam, sanctos
apostolos Petrum et Paulum, omnes sanctos, ette, pater, orare pro
me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.

  R. I confess to almighty God, to blessed Mary, ever virgin, to
  blessed Michael the archangel, to blessed John the baptist, to
  the holy apostles Peter and Paul, to all the saints, and to
  thee, O father, that I have grievously sinned in thought, word,
  and deed: _through my fault, through my fault, through my
  exceeding great fault._ Therefore I beseech the blessed
  Mary, ever virgin, blessed Michael the archangel, blessed John
  the baptist, the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and all the
  saints, and thee, O father, to pray to the Lord our God for me.

P. Misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus, et dimissis peccatis
vestris, perducat vos ad vitam æternam.

  R. Amen.

P. May almighty God have mercy on you, forgive you your sins, and
bring you to life everlasting.

  R. Amen.

{343}

P. Indulgentiam, absolutionem, et remissionem peccaturum
nostrorum, tribuat nobis omnipotens et misericors Dominus.

  R. Amen.

P. May the almighty and merciful Lord grant us pardon,
absolution, and remission of our sins.

  R. Amen.

P. Deus, tu conversus vivificabis nos.

  P. O God, thou being turned towards us, wilt receive us.

R. Et plebs tua lætabitur in te.

  R. And thy people shall rejoice in thee.

P. Ostende nobis, Domine, misericordiam tuam.

  P. Show us thy mercy, O Lord.

R. Et salutare tuum da nobis.

  R. And grant us thy salvation.

P. Domine, exaudi orationem meam.

  P. O Lord, hear my prayer.

R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

  R. And let my cry come unto thee.

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. The Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.


  When the Priest goes up to the Altar, say,

Take away from us our iniquities, we beseech thee, O Lord, that
we may be worthy to assist with pure minds at the celebration of
these tremendous mysteries; through Christ our Lord. Amen.

{344}

When he bows down before the Altar, say,

We beseech thee, O Lord, by the merits of thy saints, whose
relics are enclosed in this altar, and of all the saints, that
thou wouldst vouchsafe to forgive us all our sins. Amen.

  Here at Solemn Masses, the Priest having blessed the incense
  with the sign of the cross, and these words, "Mayest thou be
  blessed by him in whose honour thou wilt be burned," fumes the
  altar therewith, and then turning to the book, reads the
  Introit, which, being different every day, may be supplied by
  the following prayer:

It is in thy name, O adorable Trinity! it is to honour thee, and
to do thee homage, that I assist at this most holy and august
sacrifice. Permit me, then, O Lord, to unite my intention with
that of thy minister now at the altar, in offering up this
precious victim; and give me the same sentiments I ought to have
had on Mount Calvary, had I been an eye-witness of that bloody
sacrifice.


               After which follows:


P. Kyrie eleison.

  P. Lord have mercy on us.

R. Kyrie eleison.

  P. Lord have mercy on us.

P. Kyrie eleison.

  P. Lord have mercy on us.

R. Christe eleison,

  R. Christ have mercy on us.

R. Christe eleison,

  R. Christ have mercy on us.

R. Christe eleison,

  R. Christ have mercy on us.

P. Kyrie eleison.

  P. Lord have mercy on us.

P. Kyrie eleison.

  P. Lord have mercy on us.

P. Kyrie eleison.

  P. Lord have mercy on us.

{345}

  Then, if it be neither Lent or Advent, nor a Mass for the Dead,
  is said or sung the angelical hymn, "Gloria in Excelsis."


Gloria in excelsis Deo, et in terra pax hominibus bonæ
voluntatis. Laudamus te, benedicimus te, adoramus te,
glorificamus te. Gratias agimus tibi propter magnam gloriam tuam,
Domine Deus, Rex cœlestis, Deus Pater omnipotens. Domine Fili
unigenite Jesu Christe, Domine Deus, Agnus Dei, Filius Patris,
qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis; qui tollis peccata
mundi, suscipe deprecationem nostram; qui sedes ad dexteram
Patris, miserere nobis. Quoniam tu solus sanctus, tu solus
Dominus, tu solus altissimus, Jesu Christe, cum Sancto Spiritu,
in gloria Dei Patris. Amen.


  Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace to men of good
  will. We praise thee, we bless thee, we adore thee, we glorify
  thee. We give thanks to thee for thy great glory, O Lord God,
  heavenly King, God the Father, almighty. O Lord Jesus Christ,
  the only begotten Son. O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the
  Father, who takest away the sins of the world have mercy on us;
  who takest away the sins of the world, receive our prayer; who
  sitteth at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us. For
  thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only, O Jesus
  Christ, together with the Holy Ghost, art most high, in the
  glory of God the Father. Amen.

{346}

The Priest, turning towards the people, says,

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. The Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

R. And with thy  spirit.

  Going to the book, he reads the Collects, which being different
  every day, may be supplied by the following prayer:

Almighty and eternal God, we humbly beseech thee to look down
from thy heavenly sanctuary upon this congregation, and
graciously hear these prayers which thy Church addresses to thee
for us by the ministry of this thy priest. Grant us, in thy
infinite mercy, pardon of our sins, health of mind and body,
peace in our days, unity and increase of Catholic faith, fervent
charity, sincere devotion, patience in suffering, and every thing
else conducive to thy glory and our own salvation; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

  At the end of the Collects, the Clerk answers, Amen. Whilst the
  Priest reads the Epistle for the day,* the following prayer may
  be said.

O eternal God, who never ceasest to excite us to the worship and
love of thy holy name, or to arm us against the attacks of the
world, the flesh, and the devil, by the public ministry of thy
church, by the doctrine of thy prophets and apostles, and by many
other holy admonitions; grant we may faithfully attend to these
lessons of salvation, that thus our knowledge of thy law may
never rise in judgment against us, but guide us securely to thee:
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

  * See Gospels and Epistles for all Sundays and festivals,
  p. 388 to 481.

{347}

  At the end of the Epistle, the Clerk answers,

R. Deo gratias.

  R. Thanks be to God.

  Whilst the Priest reads the Gradual, or the Tract, which
  differs every day, the following may be said:

How wonderful, O Lord, is thy name throughout the whole earth: I
will bless our Lord at all times; his praise shall be always in
my mouth. Be thou my God and my protector. In thee alone will I
put my trust; O let me never be confounded.


            The Prayer Before The Gospel.

Cleanse my heart and my lips, O almighty God, who didst cleanse
the lips of the prophet Isaiah with a burning coal; and
vouchsafe, through thy gracious mercy, so to purify me, that I
may worthily attend to thy holy gospel: through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Bless me, O Lord.

May the Lord be in my heart, and on my lips, that I may worthily
and in a becoming manner, attend to his holy gospel. Amen.

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. The Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo,

  R. And with thy spirit.

P. Sequentia [_vel_ initium] sancti Evangelii secundum, &c.

  P. The continuation [_or_ the beginning] of the holy
  Gospel according to St. &o.

R. Gloria tibi, Domine.

  R. Glory be to thee,  O Lord.

{348}

  Whilst the Priest reads the Gospel of the day, [Footnote 3] the
  following prayer may be said:

    [Footnote 3: See Gospels and Epistles for all Sundays and
    festivals, pp. 388-481.]

It is not thy interpreters, O God, who are now to instruct me; it
is thy only Son; it is his word I am about to hear. I most
gratefully embrace this heavenly doctrine. I _stand up_ to
declare in the face of heaven and earth, that I will walk
faithfully in that way which he hath marked out for me. He tells
me here, "that it will avail a man nothing to gain the whole
world, if he lose his own soul; that the sensual, the covetous,
the worldling, the libertine, the detractor, and such as are
insensible to the miseries of the poor, shall have no share in
his heavenly kingdom; and that in order to become his disciple, I
must take up my cross and follow him." I receive with my whole
heart all these sacred maxims. Grant me the grace to put them in
practice; for to what purpose should I declare myself thy
disciple, if I were not to live according to the maxims of thy
gospel?


  At the end of the Gospel, the Clerk answers,

R. Laus tibi Christe.

  R. Praise be to thee, O Christ.


  Then say with the Priest, in a low voice, "May our sins be
  blotted out by the words of the Gospel."


             The Nicene Creed.

Credo in unum Deum, Patrem omnipotentem, factorem cœli et terrae,
visibilium omnium et invisibilium.

{349}

Et in unum Dominum Jesum Christum, Filium Dei unigenitum; et ex
Patre natum ante omnia sæcula; Deum de Deo; Lumen de Lumine; Deum
verum de Deo vero; Genitum non factum; consubstantialem Patri,
per quem omnia facta sunt. Qui propter nos homines, et propter
nostram salutem, descendit de cœlis, et incarnatus est de Spiritu
Sancto, ex Maria Virgine; [Footnote 4] ET HOMO FACTUS EST.
Crucifixus etiam pro nobis, sub Pontio Pilato passus, et sepultus
est; et resurrexit tertia die, secundum scripturas; et ascendit
in cœlum, sedet ad dexteram Patris et iterum venturus est cum
gloria judicare vivos et mortuos; cujus regni non erit finis.

Et in Spiritum Sanctum, Dominum et Vivificantem, qui ex Patre
Filioque procedit; qui cum Patre et Filio simul adoratur et
conglorificatur; qui locutus est per prophetas. Et unam sanctam
Catholicam et Apostolicam Ecclesiam Confiteor unam Baptisma in
remissionem peccatorum. Et expecto resurrectionem mortuorum, et
vitam venturi sæculi. Amen.

  I Believe in one God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and
  earth, and of all things visible and invisible.

  And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God; and
  born of the Father before ail ages; God of God; Light of Light;
  true God of true God; begotten, not made; consubstantial to the
  Father, by whom all things were made. Who for us men, and for
  our salvation, came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the
  Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary; [Footnote 4] AND WAS MADE, MAN.
  Was crucified also for us, suffered under Pontius Pilate, and
  was buried; and the third day he rose again, according to the
  scriptures; and ascended into heaven, sitteth at the right hand
  of the Father, and shall come again with glory to judge both
  the living and the dead; of whose kingdom there shall be no
  end.

  And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who
  proceedeth from the Father and the Son; who, together with the
  Father and the Son, is adored and glorified; who spake by the
  prophets. And one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. I confess
  one baptism for the remission of sins. And I expect the
  resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.
  Amen.

    [Footnote 4: At these words the people kneel down to
    adore God for the ineffable mystery of the incarnation.]

{350}

                    Part II.

  The Preparation And Sanctification Of The Bread And Wine For
  The Use Of The Sacrifice.

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. The Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.

P. Oremus.

  P. Let us pray.


  During the Offertory, which differs every day, may be said the
  following Prayers:

O Holy Father, almighty and eternal God, how unworthy soever I
may appear in thy presence, yet I presume to offer thee this
host, by the hands of the priest, with the same intention which
Christ my Saviour had when he first instituted this august
sacrifice, and which he now has at this very instant that he
immolates himself for us.
{351}
I offer it in acknowledgment of thy supreme dominion over me and
all creatures. I offer it in expiation of my crimes, in
thanksgiving for all thy benefits. I offer it to obtain from thy
infinite goodness, for my parents, benefactors, friends, and
enemies, all those precious gifts and graces which only through
him can be obtained, who is JUST by excellence, and who became a
victim for the sins of man. I earnestly entreat thee to bless and
protect the holy Catholic Church; our chief pastor the Pope, our
Bishops and Clergy; the Queen and Royal Family; and all our
fellow-subjects of every denomination. Remember also, O Lord, the
souls of the faithful departed; and grant them, through the
merits of thy Son, eternal light and peace. Have mercy upon all
heretics, infidels, and sinners. Bless and preserve all mine
enemies; and as I freely forgive them the injuries they have
done, or mean to do me, so do thou, in thy mercy, forgive me mine
offences. Amen.



      The Priest offering up the Host, says,

Accept, O holy Father, almighty and eternal God, this unspotted
host, which I, thy unworthy servant, offer unto thee, my living
and true God, for my own innumerable sins, offences, and
negligences, and for all here present, as also for all faithful
Christians, both living and dead, that it may avail both me and
them unto eternal life. Amen.

{352}

  Putting the Wine and Water into the Chalice, he says,

O God, who, in creating human nature, hast wonderfully dignified
it, and still more wonderfully reformed it, grant that, by the
mystery of this water and wine, we may be made partakers of his
divinity, who vouchsafed to become partaker of our humanity,
_namely_, Jesus Christ our Lord, thy Son, who, with thee, in
the unity of the Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth God, for ever
and ever. Amen.

         At Offering the Chalice, he says,

We offer thee, O Lord, the chalice of salvation, beseeching thy
clemency, that it may ascend before thy divine Majesty, as a most
sweet odour, for our salvation, and for that of the whole world.
Amen.


        The Priest humbly bowing himself, says,

Accept us, O Lord, in the spirit of humility, and contrition of
heart; and grant that the sacrifice which we offer this day in
thy sight, may be pleasing to thee, O Lord God.


      At blessing the Bread and Wine, he says,

Come, O almighty and eternal God, the Sanctifier, and bless this
sacrifice prepared for the glory of thy holy name.


  Here, in solemn Masses, he blesses the Incense, saying,

May the Lord, by the intercession of the blessed Michael the
Archangel, who standeth at the right side of the altar of
perfumes, and of all his elect, vouchsafe to bless this incense,
and receive it as an odour of sweetness: through Christ our Lord.
Amen.


     At incensing the Bread and Wine, he says,

May this incense which thou hast blessed, O Lord, ascend to thee,
and may thy mercies descend upon us.

{353}

    At incensing the Altar, he says, Psalm cxl.

Let my prayer ascend, O Lord, like incense, in thy sight; and the
lifting up of my hands, as an evening sacrifice: place, O Lord, a
guard upon my mouth, and a gate of prudence before my lips; that
my heart may not wander after words of malice, to seek excuses in
sin.


      Giving the Censer to the Deacon, he says,

May the Lord enkindle within us the fire of his love, and the
flames of everlasting charity. Amen.


    At washing his Hands, he says, Psalm xxv. 6.

I will wash my hands among the innocent; and go up to thy altar,
O Lord, that I may hear the voice of praise: and publish all thy
wonderful works. O Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house,
and the place where thy glory dwelleth. Destroy not my soul with
the impious: nor my life with men of blood. In whose hands are
iniquities: their right hand is filled with bribes. But I have
walked in mine innocence: rescue me, and have mercy on me. My
feet have stood in the right path: in the assembly of the
faithful I will bless thee, O Lord. Glory, &c.



     Bowing in the midst of the Altar, he says,

Accept, O holy Trinity, this oblation which we make thee, in
memory of the passion, resurrection, and ascension of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and in honour of the ever blessed Virgin Mary, the
blessed John Baptist, the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and all
the saints, that it may be available to their honour and to our
salvation. And may they vouchsafe to intercede for us in heaven,
whose memory we celebrate on earth: through the same Christ our
Lord. Amen.

{354}

     Turning himself towards the People, he says,

Brethren, pray that my sacrifice and yours may be acceptable in
the sight of God the Father Almighty.

R. May the Lord receive the sacrifice from thy hands, to the
praise and glory of his own name, and to our benefit, and that of
all his holy church.

  When the Priest says the Secret Prayer in a low voice, which
  differs every day, you may say as follows:

Mercifully hear our prayers, O Lord, and graciously accept this
oblation, which we thy servants are making to thee; that as we
offer it to the honour of thy name, so it may be to us a means of
obtaining thy grace in this life, and in the next everlasting
happiness: through, &c.

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

  P. World without end.

R. Amen.

  R. Amen.


            The Preface.

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. The Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.

P. Sursum corda.

  P. Raise up your hearts on high.

R. Habemus ad Dominum.

  R. We have raised them to the Lord.

{355}

P. Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro.

  P. Let us give thanks to the Lord our God.

R. Dignum et justum est.

  R. It is meet and just.


  The Preface for all the Sundays in the year, except from
  Christmas to the Octave of the Epiphany, and from Ash-Wednesday
  to Whit-Sunday, inclusively.


It is truly meet, just, right, and available to salvation, that
we should always and in all places give thanks to thee, O holy
Lord, Father almighty, eternal God, who, together with thine only
begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, art one God and one Lord; not
in a singularity of one person, but in a trinity of one
substance. For what, according as thou hast revealed, we believe
of thy glory, the same we believe of the Son, the same we believe
of the Holy Ghost, without any difference or distinction. So that
in the confession of the true and eternal deity, we adore a
distinction in the person, an unity in the essence, and an
equality in the majesty; which the angels and archangels, the
cherubim, and likewise the seraphim, praise, and cease not daily
to cry out with united voice, saying,

  Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Hosts.
  The heavens and the earth are full of thy glory.
  _Hosanna_ to him who is on high.
  Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.
  _Hosanna_ to him who is on high.


  The Common Preface for Festivals which have none proper,
  and in Masses for the Dead.

{356}

It is truly meet and just, right and available to salvation, that
we should always, and in all places, give thanks to thee, O holy
Lord, Father almighty, eternal God, through Christ our Lord; by
whom the angels praise thy Majesty; the dominations adore it; the
powers tremble before it; the heavens, the heavenly host, and
blessed seraphim, with common jubilee glorify it: together with
whom we humbly beseech thee to admit our voices of praise, saying
in the most suppliant manner, Holy, Holy, Holy, &c. (as in the
foregoing Preface for Sundays.)


                   Part III.

            The Canon Of The Mass,
       Or Main Action Of The Sacrifice.

We therefore humbly beseech thee, most merciful Father, through
Jesus Christ thy Son, our Lord, that thou wouldst vouchsafe to
accept and bless these gifts and offerings, this holy and
unspotted sacrifice, which in the first place we offer unto thee
for thy holy Catholic Church, to which we beseech thee that thou
wouldst vouchsafe to grant peace; as also to preserve, unite, and
govern it, throughout the world; together with thy servant
_N_. our Pope, _N_. our Bishop, and _N_. our
Queen, as also all orthodox believers and professors of the
Catholic and Apostolic faith.


          Commemoration Of The Living.

Be mindful, O Lord, of thy servants, men and women, [_name
them_.]

  [Here the Priest prays awhile for those he intends to pray
  for:]

And of all here present, whose faith and devotion are known unto
thee; for whom we offer, or who offer up to thee this sacrifice
of praise for themselves, and for all that belong to them; for
the redemption of their own souls; for the safety and salvation
they hope for; and who now pay their vows to thee, the eternal,
living, and true God.

{357}

Being united in communion with the saints, and honouring, in the
first place, the memory of the glorious Mary, ever virgin, mother
of our Lord Jesus Christ; as also of the blessed apostles and
martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James,
Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and Thadeus, Linus, Cletus,
Clement, Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Laurence, Chrysogonus, John
and Paul, Cosmas, and Damian, and of all thy saints; by whose
merits and prayers, grant that we may on all occasions be
defended by the help of thy protection: through the same Christ
our Lord. Amen.


  Spreading his hands over the Oblation, he says,

We therefore beseech thee, O Lord, graciously to accept this
offering of our homage, as also of thy whole family: dispose our
days in thy peace, preserve us from eternal damnation, and rank
us in the number of thine elect: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Which oblation do thou, O Lord, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, in
all respects, to bless, approve, ratify, and accept; that it may
be made to us the body and blood of thy most beloved Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ:

{358}

Who, the day before he suffered, took bread into his sacred and
venerable hands, and with his eyes lifted up towards heaven, to
thee, almighty God, his father, giving thanks, he blessed it,
brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying:

  "Take, and eat ye all of this,
  for THIS IS MY BODY."


      At Solemn Masses, daring the Elevation,
         this Hymn is sometimes song:

  O Salutaris hostia,
  Quæ cœli pandis ostium;
  Bella premunt hostilia,
  Da robur, fer auxilium.
  Uni trinoque Domino,
  Sit sempiterna gloria:
  Qui vitam sine termino,
  Nobis donet in patria.

    O saving host, that heaven's gate,
    Laidst open at so dear a rate;
    Intestine war invade our breast;
    Be thou our strength, support, and rest.
    To God the Father, and the Son,
    And Holy Spirit, three in one,
    Be endless praise: may He above.
    With life eternal crown our love.


  After the Priest has adored and elevated the sacred Host, he
  proceeds:

In like manner, after he had supped, taking this most excellent
chalice into his sacred and venerable hands, and giving thanks
also unto thee, he blessed it, and gave it to his disciples,
saying:

  "Take, and drink ve all of this,
  for this is the chalice of my blood,
  of the new and eternal testament--
  the mystery of faith, which shall be shed for you
  and for many, to the remission of sins,"

  "As often as ye do these things,
  ye shall do them in commemoration of me."


  Here, after he has adored and elevated the Chalice, he goes on:

{359}

Wherefore, we thy servants, O Lord, as also thy holy people,
being mindful as well of the blessed passion of the same Christ
thy Son our Lord, as of his resurrection from the dead, and his
glorious ascension into heaven, offer unto thy most excellent
Majesty, of thy gifts bestowed upon us, a pure host, a holy host,
an immaculate host, the holy bread of eternal life, and chalice
of everlasting salvation.

Upon which vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to look with a propitious
and pleasing countenance, and to accept them, as thou wert
pleased graciously to accept the gifts of thy just servant Abel,
and the sacrifice of our patriarch Abraham, and that which thy
high priest Melchisedech offered unto thee, a holy sacrifice and
spotless victim.

We most humbly beseech thee, O Almighty God, that thou wouldst
command these offerings to be carried by the hands of thy holy
angel unto thine altar on high, in the sight of thy divine
Majesty, that as many of us as _assist at this oblation_, or
partake of the sacred body and blood of thy Son, may be filled
with every heavenly grace and blessing: through the same Christ
our Lord. Amen.


          The Commemoration Of The Dead.

Be mindful, O Lord, of thy servants, men and women, who are gone
before us with the sign of faith, and rest in the sleep of peace.

  [Here such Dead as are prayed for, should be particularly
  mentioned.]

To these, O Lord, and to all who sleep in Christ, grant, we
beseech thee, a place of refreshment, light, and peace: through
the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

{360}

    Striking his breast, he says:

And to us also, thy unworthy servants, who hope in the multitude
of thy mercies, vouchsafe to grant some part and fellowship with
thy holy apostles and martyrs, with John, Stephen, Matthias,
Barnabas, Ignatius, Alexander, Marcelline, Peter, Felicitas,
Perpetua, Agatha, Lucy, Agnes, Cecily, Anastasia, and all thy
saints: into whose company we beseech thee to admit us, not in
confidence of any merit of our own, but of thine own gracious
mercy and pardon: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

By whom, O Lord, thou dost always create, sanctify, quicken,
bless, and give us those good gifts; so, by him, with him, and in
him is to thee, O God the Father Almighty, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost, all honour and glory.

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

  P. For ever and ever,

R. Amen.

  R. Amen.



                    Part IV.

               The Communion, Or
        Sacramental Part Of The Canon.


                  Let Us Pray.

Instructed in thy saving precepts, and following thy divine
directions, we presume to say:

Our Father, &c.

R. But deliver us from evil.

P. Amen.

{361}

Deliver us we beseech thee, O Lord, from all evils, past,
present, and to come. And by the intercession of the blessed and
ever glorious Virgin Mary, mother of God, and of the holy
apostles Peter and Paul, of Andrew, and of all the saints
mercifully grant peace in our days, that through the assistance
of thy mercy, we may be always free from sin, and secure from all
disturbance: through the same Lord Jesus Christ thy son, who
liveth and reigneth with thee God, in unity with the holy Ghost.

P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.

  P. World without end.

R. Amen.

  R. Amen.

P. Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum.

  P. May the peace of the Lord be always with you;

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.


  Breaking the Host, he puts a particle thereof into the Chalice,
  saying:


May this mixture together, and consecration of the body and blood
of our Lord Jesus be to us that receive it, or _assist
thereat_, effectual to eternal life. Amen.


  Then bowing and striking his breast, he says thrice:

Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world,
have mercy on us.

Lamb of God who takest away the sins of the world,
have mercy on us.

Lamb of God who takest away the sins of the world,
give us peace.

{362}

  In Masses for the Dead, instead of "Have mercy on us," he says,
  twice, "Give them rest," and lastly "Give them eternal rest."
  The following Prayer is also omitted:

Lord Jesus Christ who saidst to thy apostles "I leave you peace,
I give you my peace," regard not my sins, but the faith of thy
church, and vouchsafe to grant her that peace and unity which is
agreeable to thy will; who livest and reignest for ever and ever.
Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who, according to the
will of thy Father, with the co-operation of the Holy Ghost,
hast, by thy death, given life to the world, deliver me by this
thy most sacred body and blood, from all my iniquities, and from
all evils; make me always live up to thy commandments; and never
suffer me to be separated from thee, who livest and reignest with
God the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without
end. Amen.

Let not the participation of thy body, O Lord Jesus Christ, which
I, though unworthy, presume to receive, turn to my judgment and
condemnation; but let it, through thy mercy, become a safeguard
and remedy, both of soul and body: who with God the Father, in
the unity of the Holy Ghost, livest and reignest God for ever and
ever. Amen.


  Kneeling, rising, and taking the Host in his hands, he says:

I will partake of this heavenly bread, and call upon the name of
the Lord.


  He strikes his breast, saying devoutly, thrice:

Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof;
speak only the word, and my soul shall be healed.

{363}

  During the time of the Priest's communicating, it would be
  profitable for persons who are not then in a state of actually
  communicating, to communicate also spiritually or in desire;
  for this purpose say the following prayer:

O that I were among the number of those whose sanctity allows
them to communicate daily! What a happiness, O my God! could I at
this moment erect a throne for thee in my heart, pay thee my
homage, lay open to thee my wants, and participate in the favours
thou grantest to those who _really_ and _worthily
receive_ thee. But since I am unworthy, do thou, O Lord,
supply my want of the proper dispositions. Grant the pardon of my
manifold sins, which I detest from the bottom of my heart,
because they displease thee. Cast thy compassionate eye upon me,
and purify my soul, that the ardent wish I now conceive to be
united to thee by a worthy communion may be speedily
accomplished. But until the arrival of so happy a moment I
earnestly entreat thee, O dearest Lord, that thou wouldst make me
partaker of all those advantages which the communion of the
priest may produce in those thy people. By the efficacy of this
enlivening sacrament, increase my faith, strengthen my hope,
revive in my soul the rays of divine charity, inflame my heart
with thy love, that it may pant only for thee and live for thee
alone. Amen.


  Receiving reverently both parts of the Host, he says:

May the body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life
everlasting. Amen.

{364}

           Taking the Chalice, he says:

What return shall I make to the Lord for all the good things that
he hath given unto me? I will partake of the chalice of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Praising I will
call upon the Lord, and I shall be saved from mine enemies.


   Receiving the Blood of our Saviour, he says:

May the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life
everlasting. Amen.


     Taking the first Ablution, he says:

Grant, Lord, that what we have partaken of with our mouth, we may
receive with purity of mind; and that of a temporal gift it may
become unto us an everlasting remedy. Amen.


     Taking the second Ablution, he says:

May thy body, O Lord, which I have received, and thy blood which
I have drank, cleave to my soul: and grant that no stain of sin
remain within me, who have been fed with this pure and holy
sacrament. Who livest and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.


  Having wiped his Mouth, his Fingers, and the Chalice, he then
  continues the Mass.

The Communion being every day different, what follows may be
said:

Let it be now, O Lord, an effect of thy mercy, that we who have
been present at this holy mystery may find the benefit thereof in
our souls.

{365}

                     Part V.

      The Public Thanksgiving After Communion.

Dominus vobiscum:

  The Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.

P. Oremus.

  P. Let us pray.


  The Post Communion being also different every day, what follows
  may be said:

We give thee thanks O God, for thy mercy in admitting us to have
a part in offering this sacrifice to thy holy name: accept it now
to thy glory, and be ever mindful of our weakness; pardon all our
defects, and grant our request; through, &c. Amen.

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. May the Lord be with you:

B. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.

P. Ite, Missa est.

  P. Depart, the Mass is finished.


  Or, if "Gloria in excelsis" has not been said,

P. Benidicamus Domino.

  P. Let us bless the Lord.

R. Deo gratias.

 R. Thanks be to God.

         In Masses for the Dead.

P. Requiescant in pace.

  P. May they rest in peace.

R. Amen.

  R. Amen.

{366}

May the performance of this my homage be pleasing to thee, O Holy
Trinity; and grant that the sacrifice which I, though unworthy,
have offered up, in the sight of the Divine Majesty, may be
acceptable to thee, and, through thy mercy, become a propitiation
for me, and all those for whom it hath been offered: through
Christ our Lord. Amen.


  The Priest turning himself towards the people, says, (except in
  Masses for the Dead.)

May almighty God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless you.
Amen.

P. Dominus vobiscum:

  P. May the Lord be with you:

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

  R. And with thy spirit.

P. Initium sancti Evangelii secundum Joannem.

  P. The beginning of the Gospel according to St. John.

R. Gloria tibi, Domine.

  R. Glory be to thee, O Lord.


         The Gospel According To St. John.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God
was the Word; the same was in the beginning with God. All things
were made by him; and without him was made nothing that was made.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men: and the light
shineth in darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.

There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. This man came
for a witness to give testimony of the light, that all men might
believe through him. He was not the light, but was to give
testimony of the light. It was the true light which enlighteneth
every man that cometh into this world.

{367}

He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
But as many as received him to them he gave power to be made the
sons of God, to those that believe in his name; who are born, not
of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God. And _the Word was made flesh_, and dwelt amongst
us. And we saw his glory, the glory as it were of the only
begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

R. Deo gratias.

  R. Thanks be to God.

------------------------------

             Another Devout Method

              Of Assisting At The

         Holy Sacrifice Of The Mass,

  By turning the attention and affections of the soul towards the
  mysteries of our blessed Saviour's passion and death, which are
  thereby represented and shown forth according to these words,
  THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME; that is, for a perpetual and
  grateful commemoration of my sufferings and death, as the
  apostle explains it.
    1 _Corinthians_ xi. 26.


  The Mass is called by St. Francis of Sales, _Introd_.
  _p_. 2, _c_. 14, the sun of spiritual exercises, the
  centre of religion, the heart of devotion, and the soul of
  piety. It is offered to none but God alone; as the nature of a
  sacrifice, in the common judgment of all mankind, is to
  acknowledge the supreme dominion of God over us, and our total
  subjection and dependence on him. It is a standing memorial and
  a commemorative sacrifice, that represents the sacrifice of the
  cross, and was prefigured by the sacrifice of Melchisedech, and
  foretold by the prophet Malichi.--c. i. v. 10. The faithful
  should go to it as if they were going to Mount Calvary, to be
  present at the crucifixion and death of Jesus Christ, and
  assist at it with a grateful remembrance and a feeling sense of
  his sufferings.
{368}
  The altar on which this great sacrifice is offered, with a
  crucifix erected thereon, is a figure of Mount Calvary, and of
  Christ crucified. The corporal and linen cloth that covered the
  altar, signify the linen cloth that wrapped the sacred body of
  Christ when he was buried. The chalice denotes the holy
  sepulchre of our Lord. The paten denotes the great stone that
  was rolled against the door of the sepulchre. The two candles
  signify the two testaments, and the light of faith revealed to
  the Jews and Gentiles. The priest who officiates represents the
  person of Christ, who is the High Priest of the New Law; his
  tonsure represents the crown of thorns which Christ wore; and
  the robes with which he is vested, represents the robes of
  derision with which Christ was ignominiously clothed. The amice
  represents the veil with which his eyes were muffled, when he
  was desired to prophesy who it was that struck him. The alb
  represents the white robe with which he was covered by Herod
  out of contempt. The cincture, maniple, and stole represent the
  cords and bandages with which he was bound like a malefactor.
  The chasuble, or outward vestment, represents the purple
  garment with which he was clothed like a mock king. The figure
  of a pillar on the front of the chasuble, represents the stone
  pillar at which he was scourged; and the figure of a cross on
  the back, represents the wooden cross which he carried on his
  shoulders from Jerusalem to Mount Calvary. The three languages,
  Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which are used in the Mass, remind us
  of the title of the cross, which was written in Hebrew, Greek,
  and Latin letters. The different parts and ceremonies of the
  Mass correspond to the different stations of his passion, and
  represent all that happened from his entering into the Garden
  of Olives, until the day of his ascension into heaven, and the
  descent of the Holy Ghost upon the apostles; _as will appear
  to the devout reader of the explanations premised to each
  prayer_.

{369}

              A Prayer Before Mass.

O Divine Spirit, descend into my soul, purify it from the dross
of its imperfections, and replenish it with the flames of thy
sacred affections, that it may breathe nothing but thy love, and
desire nothing but the accomplishment of thy will. O ye angels,
saints, and all creatures, come help me to honour, praise, bless,
and love our Lord Jesus Christ, who once offered himself a bloody
sacrifice on the cross for my salvation, and now offers himself
an unbloody sacrifice on the altar for the same end.

Give me grace, O sweet Jesus, to assist at this holy sacrifice
with the fervour and devotion of the pious shepherds in the
stable of Bethlehem; and with a lively faith, profound respect,
and humility of the three wise men of the East, who came to adore
thee in the manger, and to offer thee the three mystical presents
of frankincense, gold, and myrrh, in testimony of thy divinity,
royalty and humanity. And now, since I, who am but dust and
ashes, have presumed to speak, permit me to follow thee in spirit
through the different stages of thy passion, and accompany thee
to Mount Calvary.--Make me partaker of that charity which
conducted thee to it, that I may return love for love, life for
life, death for death. Give me such a feeling sense of thy
sufferings, as the daughters of Sion had, when they met thee with
thy cross on thy shoulders, and a thorny crown on thy head. Grant
me resignation of my will to thine, like that of thy Virgin
Mother at the foot of the cross. Prostrate before the throne of
thy divine Majesty, I humbly implore thy pardon for all my
offences, and thy grace to avoid relapse into sin.
{370}
I offer up this divine sacrifice, by the hands of thy priest, to
the glory of thy name; in acknowledgment of thy infinite
greatness, and of my own nothingness; in thanksgiving for all thy
benefits; in satisfaction for all my sins; in memory of thy
dolorous passion; and to obtain of thy bounty, for myself and for
thy whole church, for my superiors, spiritual and temporal, for
my parents, benefactors, friends, and enemies, and all mankind,
those precious graces and favours which thou knowest us to stand
in most need of.


                   Explanation.

  "The priest going from the sacristy to the altar, and retiring
  to the foot of it, in order to recite the 42nd psalm, _Judica
  me Deus_, &c. represents Jesus Christ retiring from his last
  supper, and praying to his heavenly Father in the garden of
  Gethsemani, situate at the foot of Mount Olivet. The beginning
  of the Mass, with the sign of the cross, and the invocation of
  the three persons of the most Holy Trinity, signifies that it
  is in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
  Ghost, that the faithful assembled, in order to celebrate the
  memory of Christ's passion and death. The psalm which is then
  repeated, expresses the deep concern of a soul kept at a
  distance from the temple of God, like David when he was
  persecuted by Saul, and the ardent desires with which we are to
  approach the altar, and partake of the divine mysteries. The
  _Introit_, or entrance of the Mass, and the
  _Confiteor_, or general confession made to the whole court
  of heaven, represent the fall of Adam, which was the source of
  all our miseries, and remind us that we ought to dispose
  ourselves for this great sacrifice by a sincere repentance for
  our sins."

{371}

          Prayer At The Beginning Of Mass.

O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercies I will enter thy house,
and adore thee in thy holy temple and confess to thy name. Though
my sins are without number, I have still thy goodness to appeal
to, I have still a confidence in the sufferings of my Redeemer,
and hope, through his infinite merits, to find mercy, grace, and
salvation. Thou, O dear Jesus, hast washed me once in baptism;
wash me yet more from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins.
Sprinkle me with the hyssop of thy blood, and I shall be
cleansed; wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.


                   Explanation.

  "The priest bowing down before the altar, and saying the
  _Confiteor_, represents our Saviour loaded with the sins
  of mankind, prostrate at his prayers in the garden, and falling
  into a bloody sweat and most painful agony. The priest going up
  to the altar and kissing it, represents our Saviour going to
  meet his enemies, and receiving the treacherous kiss from
  Judas. When he goes to the book at the corner of the Epistle,
  forms the sign of the cross, and reads the _Introit_, he
  represents our Saviour seized, bound, and led captive to the
  courts of Annas and Caiphas, where he was struck across the
  face, blindfolded, buffeted, spit upon, and treated with the
  greatest indignity, by the servants of the high priest, as if
  he were a mock prophet."


        Prayer At The Introit And Kyrie.

Blessed be thou, O Jesus, for all thou hast suffered for our
redemption. It is but just that my sins should draw tears from my
eyes, since they have drawn streams of blood from thy veins. I
desire to join the most humble contrition of my soul with thy
agony in the garden, and resolve to be sorry for my sins, even
unto the hour of my death.
{372}
My heart is pierced with grief to think that I have repaid thy
goodness with such ingratitude; but until I cease to live, I will
never cease to cry, with the humble publican: _O God be
propitious to me a sinner_. May those bonds that tied thy
innocent hands, loosen the chains of my sins, break the fetters
of my iniquities, deliver me from the captivity of Satan, and
restore me to the sweet liberty of thy children, that I may be
enabled to cry out with thy prophet: _Thou hast broken my
chains: I will sacrifice to thee an host of praise_. I cast
myself at thy feet, and beseech thee by thy infinite charity, to
strengthen me with thy all-powerful grace under all trials and
afflictions. Never suffer me to betray thy sacred truths, or to
take part with the world against thee. Grant that when any
tribulation or anguish shall assault me, I may receive it with
humility like unto thine, and with a true submission and
resignation to thy heavenly Father's will. Grant that under the
severest scourges I may call upon thee as a father, confide in
thee as a father, and seek no comfort out of thee. Remember me at
my last hour, when the terrors of death shall begin to seize me;
then let thy angels comfort me; then let the memory of thy
sufferings support me against all apprehensions, that no fear of
death or judgment may ever lessen the hope I ought to repose in
thee.

{373}

                 Explanation.

  "The repetition of the _Kyrie Eleison, Christe Eleison_,
  &c. (that is, Lord have mercy on us, Christ have mercy on us,)
  three times, in honour of each of the three Divine Persons,
  reminds us that Christ was denied three times by St. Peter. The
  _Dominus vobiscum_, or, Our Lord be with you, which is the
  usual salutation in the scriptures, and which the priest says
  after the _Gloria in Excelsis_, it being the greatest of
  all blessings for the Lord to be with us, and we with him,
  reminds us how Peter was touched with repentance, when Christ
  cast a glance of his merciful eyes upon him. The aforesaid
  hymn, which a choir of angels sung in the air at our Saviour's
  birth, denotes the joy that is in heaven among the angels upon
  the conversion of a sinner, The _Kyries_ also remind us of
  the longing desires of the holy fathers for the coming of the
  Messiah. The _Gloria_ represents Christ's nativity. The
  Collects, Epistle, and Gospel, his prayers, miracles, and
  preaching.--The priest returning to the epistle side of the
  altar, and reading the Collects and the Lesson, represents
  Christ sent by Caiphas to Pilate, after being falsely accused
  and unjustly condemned by the Sanhedrin of the Jews. Then the
  priest goes to the middle of the altar, and humbly bowing
  himself down, prays in silence. This represents Christ
  conducted to Herod, and interrogated and scoffed at by him,
  without returning the least answer, or saying a word to justify
  himself. The priest going to the gospel side of the altar, and
  returning to the middle to make a profession of faith, by
  repeating the Nicene Creed, represents Christ sent back to
  Pilate in a fool's dress, and professing that he came to bear
  witness to the truth, and that his kingdom is not of this
  world. The removal of the Mass-book from the right to the left
  side of the altar, signifies that the new law of the gospel
  being rejected by the Jews, who were the first called, was
  preached to the Gentiles, who embraced it with joy, and were
  converted to the Christian religion in great multitudes. The
  lighted candles are emblems of their spiritual joy and of God's
  glory, and denote the light of faith which Christ brought to
  the world by his gospel.--At the beginning of the gospel, the
  priest and the people make the sign of the cross, first upon
  their foreheads, to signify that they are not ashamed of the
  cross of Christ, nor of his doctrine; secondly, upon their
  mouths, to denote that they are ready to profess it openly by
  word of mouth; and thirdly, upon their breasts, to signify that
  they will always preserve it carefully in their hearts. The
  people rise up and stand during the gospel, to show by this
  posture their readiness to go and practise whatever they shall
  be commanded by the word of God."

{374}

    Prayer At The Gloria, Epistle, And Gospel.

Let heaven and earth join together, and the choirs of angels he
united with the voices of men, to sing eternal praises to God, in
trinity and unity, for the mercies we have received in the
admirable work of our redemption. O my amiable Jesus, how am I
bound to love thee! How black must my ingratitude be, if, after
such demonstrations of love, I can continue to offend thee! I am
the offender, I am the malefactor, and thou hast taken upon thee
the punishment due to my sins! It is I who deserve to be accused,
arraigned, dispised, and condemned, and not thou: O innocent and
spotless Lamb of God, eternal praise be to thy name. Whilst the
Jews proclaim thee a blasphemer, I own thee for my Lord; and
beseech thee, that under all reproaches and calumnies I may
remember what thou hast suffered for me, and that I may
endeavour, by an humble and patient silence, to show myself on
all occasions to be thy true disciple. Grant that whenever I am
persecuted by lies or false accusations, thy example may be my
comfort, my model, and my rule. Give me courage, constancy, and
patience, under all the injuries, crosses, and contradictions,
which thy providence shall permit to befall me during my
pilgrimage here on earth.
{375}
Do not suffer me to despair of thy mercy, or die in my sins, like
unhappy Judas: but soften my stony heart, and melt it into tears
of compunction. Leave me not to myself, but teach me to confide
wholly in thee. Look on me with an eye of pity, and awaken me
from the sleep of death, that I may bewail my past sins in the
bitterness of my soul, and persevere in serving thee and
promoting thy glory. May the fall of Peter be a lesson to me all
the days of my life, to shun all evil company, to fly all the
dangerous occasions of sin, and never to deny thee, my Lord and
my God, either by word or deed; but openly to profess my faith
without fear or shame. I thank thee for revealing thy heavenly
truths, and for instructing us by thy holy apostles in the only
true saving faith. Give me grace to attend to thy doctrine, to
live up to the maxims of thy gospel, to profess thy faith by the
practice of good works, and never to swerve from thy sacred law.
Have mercy on all those that are involved in the dismal state of
mortal sin, and grant them the grace of sincere repentance. Let
the light of thy countenance shine upon those who are sitting in
the darkness of infidelity, and in the gloomy shade of death.--
Bring back the strayed sheep to thy fold, and unite them to the
communion of thy church, that we may all become one sheepfold
under one shepherd.

{376}

                   Explanation.

  "When the priest unveils the chalice for the Offertory, he
  represents Christ stripped of his garments and bound to the
  pillar. The offering of the bread on the paten, denotes Christ
  offering up his body to be scourged. The mingling of the water
  with the wine, denotes the water and blood that flowed from his
  side on the cross. The offering the chalice with the wine,
  represents Christ scourged, and the streams of his blood
  flowing down upon the ground. The covering the chalice with the
  paten, represents him crowned with thorns, and treated as a
  mock king. The washing of the fingers at the _Lavabo_,
  reminds us how Pilate washed his hands before the multitude,
  and pronounced Christ innocent and just. The _Orate
  Fratres_ reminds us that Christ was shown to the people with
  ensigns of mock royalty, Pilate crying out at the same time:
  _Ecce Homo_, Behold the man. The priest saying the Secret
  Prayers in silence, represents Christ condemned to be
  crucified, and submitting to the unjust sentence without any
  defence or reply. The Preface, (so called because it serves as
  an introduction to the Canon of the Mass,) and the Canticle of
  the Hebrew children, which are repeated with a loud voice,
  remind us that Christ was loaded with the cross; the pious
  Hosanna being changed into the clamorous and cruel
  _Crucifige_, or crucify him."



    Prayer At The Offertory, Lavabo, And Preface.

O my soul! run to thy suffering Lord, and at his feet pour out
thyself in thanksgiving, and in all the ecstasies of love and
praise. It is thy God that suffers, that he may redeem a slave, a
poor sinful worm of the earth. When I behold thee, O dear Jesus,
stripped naked, fastened to the pillar, cruelly scourged, torn,
and mangled, I see the immensity of thy love for us, and the
greatness of our sins against thee. I see in thy wounds, the
slavery into which we are degraded, and the punishment due to our
crimes. Our sins bound thy hands, and every stroke thou didst
receive was the effect of our iniquities.
{377}
I offer thee my heart and soul, to be eternally consecrated to
thy divine service, and to be washed and purified in the purple
streams that gushed forth from every pore of thy sacred body. I
throw myself into the arms of thy infinite mercy, with a firm
resolution to die rather than renew thy passion, by relapsing
into any mortal sin. No, dear Redeemer, I never will prefer
Barabbas to thee; I never will set thee in competition with the
world, or its delusive charms, sinful pleasures, or sordid
interests. O amiable Jesus, thou shalt be my choice for ever. I
will strike no more nails into thy hands by my evil deeds. I will
add no more thorns to thy painful crown by my sinful thoughts. I
will no more pierce thy sacred side by any unlawful desires. I
will not scourge thy holy flesh by curses or blasphemies, nor
crucify thee over again by any fresh crime. I am determined, with
thy assistance, to put off the old man with all his acts, by a
candid and naked confession of all my past sins. O grant that I
may never appear naked of virtue in thy sight; but may be clad
with the white robe of innocence when I shall be presented before
thy awful tribunal. Pierce my heart with the thorns of penance
and compunction here, that I may, through thy merits, be crowned
with glory hereafter. Grant that whenever I am under any
affliction, meet with any adversity, disgrace or contempt, or
feel any part of the thorny crown on my head, I may rejoice in
bearing such a resemblance of thy sufferings, and show by my
patience and humility whose disciple I am.
{378}
Give me grace to submit with cheerfulness to the rod of thy
paternal correction; and support my natural weakness, that I may
not sink under the weight of any cross with which it shall please
thy Divine Providence to visit me. Disengage my heart from all
earthly affections. Raise and elevate my soul to thee, that I may
always live and converse in heaven, where thou, my only treasure,
art. I now presume to join my unworthy voice with the heavenly
choirs of all thy angels and saints, who are incessantly singing
eternal praises to thee:

  _Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth;
  Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory:
  Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord:
  Hosannah in the highest, &c._


                  Explanation.

  "The Canon, which is the most sacred and most solemn part of
  the Mass, is read in a low voice, to denote the mourning and
  affliction of the faithful at the time of our Saviour's
  passion, which amazed and silenced all nature. The priest
  raises his hands, in imitation of Moses, who, as we read,
  (_Exodus_ xvii.) prayed with his hands lifted up, whilst
  Josue was combating with the Amalekites. After the
  _Memento_ for the living he spreads his hands over the
  bread and wine that are to be consecrated, in imitation of the
  priests of the old law, who were ordered, (_Lev_. 1.) when
  they offered sacrifice, to lay their hands upon the victim
  before it was immolated. These ceremonies represent Christ led
  away to be crucified, carrying his cross on his shoulders to
  Mount Calvary, admonishing the devout women on the way, who
  wept over him, to mourn for themselves and for their children;
  and when he arrived at the end of his painful journey, stripped
  again of his garments, and laid on the painful bed, without any
  other pillow to support his head but the thorns with which he
  was crowned.
{379}
  The signing of the oblation with the sign of the cross, denotes
  how his hands and feet were stretched and nailed on the cross.
  The separated consecration of the bread and wine, represents
  his body slain, and his blood shed, for the remission of our
  sins. The elevation of the consecrated Host, represents him
  exalted on the cross in the sight of the whole multitude. The
  elevation of the Chalice represents the sacred blood flowing
  from his wounds. The ringing of the bell denotes the
  earthquakes and other signs which happened at his death. The
  five crosses formed over the oblation, signify the five
  principal wounds in his body. The time from the elevation to
  the communion corresponds to the three hours he hung alive on
  the cross. The _Memento_ for the dead denotes that whilst
  he was thus elevated between heaven and earth, he prayed as a
  powerful mediator for the whole world, even for his enemies and
  crucifiers. The conversion of the thief on the cross, on one
  side of him, is represented by the priest striking his breast,
  and saying, _nobis quoque peccatoribus_. The seven
  petitions of the _Pater Noster_ remind us of Christ's last
  words on the cross. The breaking of the Host is used in
  imitation of his having broken it before he gave it to his
  disciples at his last supper. The breaking of it in three parts
  represents his mystical body, or the church in three states:
  the blessed in heaven, the souls in purgatory, and the faithful
  on earth; this great sacrifice being offered for the whole
  church, triumphant, suffering, and militant; in honour of the
  first, that is, in thanksgiving to God for all the graces
  bestowed upon them, and for all the happiness they enjoy; for
  the relief of the second, to obtain a speedy admittance for
  them into eternal glory; and for the benefit of the last,
  according to the four great ends of sacrifice. The breaking of
  the Host also represents the death of Christ on the cross, and
  is a figure of his soul being separated from his body after he
  bowed down his sacred head. The mixing a particle of the Host
  with the sacramental species in the chalice, represents the
  descent of his soul into _Limbo_, or the prison of the
  Fathers of the old testament."

{380}

          Prayer At The Canon Of The Mass.

O King of glory! when shall I leave this earthly prison, this
miserable Babylon, and be admitted into thy lovely tabernacles? O
ocean of sweetness, and fountain of divine love, when shall I
contemplate thee face to face in thy happy kingdom? My sins are a
terror to my soul, but having so plentiful a redemption, I never
will despair. Thy wounds cry out for mercy. Mercy, then, O God of
goodness! have mercy on me. O Jesus, be a Jesus to my soul, and
save me. I am thy purchase, snatched from the jaws of hell by the
merits of thy sacred passion; accept me, therefore, an unworthy
sinner. Purify me in those sacred streams that flowed from thy
bleeding wounds, and present me to thy eternal Father, that
through thee I may obtain his blessing and favour, which of
myself I do not deserve. Extinguish in me all ambition, pride,
and vanity, the love of the world, and every degree of vicious
self-love. Grant me true humility, perfect patience, unfeigned
charity, and sincere devotion. Give me only grace to practise
what thou commandest, and command what thou pleasest. Increase
true religion; plant thy faith in our hearts; give peace and
unity to thy church; repentance and pardon to all sinners. Grant
comfort to the sick and afflicted; relief to the distressed;
mercy, grace, and salvation to all those for whom thou hast shed
thy blood, and whom I am bound to pray for, particularly
_N_.
{381}
We render thee thanks for admitting us to have a part in this
great sacrifice, which thy Catholic Church offers to thy holy
name, by the hands of the priest, for thy people. Accept it now,
we beseech thee, O Lord, to thy glory, in satisfaction for all
our offences and ingratitude, and in union with that divine
intention with which our blessed Saviour offered it up, when he
instituted it at his last supper, and consummated it upon the
altar of the cross.


           Prayer At The Elevation Of The
           Consecrated Host And Chalice.

Hail, O King of glory, Prince of peace, and Saviour of the world!
Hail, O immaculate Host! offered for me and all mankind on the
cross! I adore, bless, and glorify thee, O loving Jesus, with all
the faculties of my soul and body. May all thy creatures sound
forth thy praises. O sacrament of piety! O sign of unity! O bond
of charity! O the goodness of my God! O how wonderful are the
ways of divine love! How incomprehensible are the riches of the
divine bounty!

O my bleeding Jesus, I bow down to the ground to adore thee!
Hail! most precious blood, shed for me and the sins of the whole
world! Hear, O eternal Father, the voice of thy Son's blood, that
cries out loudly to heaven, not for vengeance, but for mercy: let
it now speak in my behalf, and plead my pardon; let it blot out
my iniquities, and cleanse my soul from all the foul stains of
sin. I beg it most humbly for the sake of Jesus, who died upon
the cross for my redemption.

{382}

            Prayer After The Elevation.

Behold, O almighty and all-gracious God, thy Son, Jesus, in whom
thou art well pleased. Look upon the face of thy Christ and my
Saviour, here present. Look upon this spotless lamb, this
adorable victim, this pure holocaust of obedience, humbled to the
very death of the cross. Behold in him what may move thee to look
down upon us with an eye of mercy, and to forgive us our sins. He
is our High Priest, sprinkled with his own blood. Receive the
sacrifice he has offered for us, in consideration of all the
honours and homages that are due to thy sovereign goodness from
me and all creatures. Extend, O compassionate Creator, the virtue
of it unto the souls in the church suffering, and grant to the
faithful departed rest and life everlasting, particularly to
_N_.; mitigate their punishment, and translate them to that
state of glory for which thou hast designed them. Thou hast
formerly promised, that looking on thy rainbow thou wouldst
remember the covenant made between thee and the patriarch Noah,
(_Genes_, ix.); canst thou then look down on the blood of
thy beloved Son Jesus, offered here to thee in sacrifice, and not
remember the great covenant of the new law, sealed and confirmed
with the effusion of his sacred blood?

{383}

O dear Jesus! that I could love thee as thy goodness deserves.
The more thou hast humbled thyself for my sake, the more I am
bound to love thee. Remember thou hast bought me at a dear rate.
O let not thy blood be lost or spilt in vain for me; but receive
me into the number of the elect. I detest my sins, which were the
cause of thy sufferings, and thy most cruel executioners. My
crimes, alas! were the nails that bored thy hands and feet, and
fastened thee to an ignominious cross. O who will give sorrow to
my heart, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, that I may bewail
them in the bitterness of my soul all the days of my life, and
that at the hour of my departure I may, by means of a true
conversion, be entitled to hear those comfortable words which
thou saidst to the penitent thief on the cross: _This day shalt
thou be with me in paradise._ I acknowledge my unworthiness, I
do not deserve to be ranked among the number of thy children, yet
I will presume to say that heavenly prayer which thou hast taught
me: "Our Father, who art in heaven," &c.


                   Explanation

  "When the priest strikes his breast, and says the _Agnus
  Dei_, (that is, O Lamb of God, &c.) he reminds us of the
  Centurion and many others striking their breasts with sorrow,
  and bewailing their offences, when they beheld Christ expiring
  on the cross, and were eye-witnesses of the prodigies which
  happened at his death.
{384}
  The Prayer for Peace, before the communion of the priest,
  signifies, that to communicate worthily, we must be in peace
  with God and our neighbour, and approach with a clean heart and
  pure conscience. The priest's communion is a sign of the burial
  of Christ's body, which was taken down from the cross, wrapped
  up in clean linen, and laid in a new monument, cut out of a
  rock, near Mount Calvary. The purifying and covering of the
  chalice represents Christ's sepulchre, shut and covered with a
  stone. The resurrection of Christ from the dead is represented
  by the priest going to the corner of the Epistle, and reading
  the Post Communion, the mass-book being brought back to the
  right side of the altar, to signify that the Jews are to be
  converted to the Christian faith at the end of the world.
  _Dominus vobiscum_ represents Christ appearing to his
  disciples, and giving them his peace. The last Collect
  represents Christ conversing forty days with his disciples, and
  speaking to them of the kingdom of God. The last _Dominus
  vobiscum_, represents Christ's last apparition to his
  disciples; and the blessing given by the priest to the people,
  denotes that Christ lifted up both his hands, and blessed his
  apostles and other disciples before he left them, and in their
  sight ascended into heaven. The _Ite Missa est_, and the
  reading of the Gospel at the left corner of the altar, denote
  that Christ came not to call the just, but sinners, to
  repentance: and sent his apostles to teach all nations; and
  that they preached the gospel with amazing success in all parts
  of the known world, after the descent of the Holy Ghost."



             Prayer At The Agnus Dei.

O Innocent Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world,
have mercy on me; for nothing is more pleasing to thee than to
have compassion on those that are miserable. Give me tears of
repentance, that I may mourn for the evil I have committed. In
thee I place all my hope, because thou alone art my salvation, my
strength, my refuge, and the fountain of all my good.
{385}
I most humbly beseech thee, by the anguish of thy passion, and by
thy sufferings on the cross, especially at that hour when thy
blessed soul left thy body, to spare me in that dreadful moment,
and have mercy on my soul. Let me experience the multitude of thy
tender mercies, when I shall be in conflict with the pangs of
death. Let thy passion and death stand then between my soul and
thy justice. I accept the sentence of my death, in whatever
manner I am to suffer it, in union with thy death on the cross. I
humbly submit to it, and now offer it to thy divine majesty as a
sacrifice and a just punishment due to my sins. I commend my soul
into thy hands, and most earnestly entreat thee to give me thy
blessing this day, and to grant me perseverance in thy service,
that on the day of judgment I may be ranked in the happy number
of those blessed souls, who are to be invited by thee to take
possession of the kingdom of thy glory. During the time of my
sojourn here on earth, preserve me from thirsting after the false
goods of this world.--May I always remember thy vinegar and
gall, and rest contented with what is sufficient to support
nature. May I every day increase in thy love, and may all created
objects be of little account with me, that thou mayest be the
only delight of my soul and my everlasting joy.


             Prayer At The Communion.

I Adore, O dear Jesus, thy sacred body and blood, soul and
divinity, here present on the altar under the sacramental forms.
{386}
Praised be this most holy sacrament with as many praises as there
are stars in the heavens, atoms in the air, drops of water in the
ocean, sands in the sea, sparks in the fire, motes of dust upon
the earth, flowers in the spring, grains of corn in the summer,
leaves in the autumn, flakes of snow and hailstones in the
winter, or creatures in the universe. O that I had the necessary
dispositions of a worthy communicant! how willingly would I unite
myself to my divine Redeemer in this sacrament of love! O may I
receive it worthily at the hour of my death, that it may serve me
as a viatic to a happy eternity. Though I am unworthy to receive
it now sacramentally, yet I wish to receive it spiritually into
my soul by faith, love, and devotion. Enter then, O divine
bridegroom, into this poor lodging: you vouchsafed to lodge in a
stable, you did not refuse to enter into the house of Zachæus,
the publican; enter into my house as into the house of another
Zachæus, and give a blessing to my soul, as thou didst to the
house of Zachæus: say unto me, as thou saidst unto him:
_Salvation is this day come to this house_.--Luke, xix.



        A Prayer At The Last Collects, &c.

Praise, honour, and glory be to thee, O blessed Redeemer, who
coming forth out of the grave, didst rise triumphantly from the
dead, and having conversed with thy disciples for forty days,
didst ascend into heaven, where thou sittest at the right hand of
thy eternal Father. Inflame my heart and soul with thee, that I
may seek nothing but to be united to thee for ever in heaven.

{387}

Hear, O eternal Father, whatever the holy Catholic Church asks of
thee in the name of thy beloved son. We beseech thee, that this
our sacrifice may be acceptable in thy sight, and become
profitable to us and to thy whole church. Receive my unworthy
prayers, supply all my defects, pardon all my indevotions,
distractions, and irreverences. Engrave in my heart the rules and
maxims of thy gospel, and give me grace to live according to
them. Teach me to follow thy example, that rising with thee to a
new life of piety and holiness, and walking in thy footsteps, I
may live to thee alone, and advance every day towards everlasting
happiness. Amen.

_I did not judge to know anything among you, but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified_.
  St. Paul, 1 Cor. ii. 2.

{388}

    The Epistles And Gospels For The Sundays
   And Principal Festivals Throughout The Year.


             First Sunday Of Advent.

Epistle.
_Romans_ xiii. 11, 14.
_Brethren_:
Know, that it is now the hour for us to rise from sleep. For now
our salvation is nearer than when we believed. The night is past,
and the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and put on the armour of light. Let us walk honestly,
as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and impurities, not in contention and envy: but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xxi. 25, 33.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: There shall be
signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the
earth distress of nations, by reason of the confusion of the
roaring of the sea and of the waves, men withering away for fear,
and expectation of what shall come upon the whole world. For the
powers of the heavens shall be moved; and then they shall see the
Son of Man coming in a cloud with great power and majesty. But
when these things begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up
your heads; because your redemption is at hand. And he spoke to
them a similitude: See the fig-tree and all the trees: when they
now shoot forth their fruit, you know that summer is nigh: so you
also, when you shall see these things come to pass, know that the
kingdom of God is at hand. Amen, I say to you, this generation
shall not pass away till all things be fulfilled. Heaven and
earth shall pass away; but my words shall not pass away. Credo.

{389}

             Second Sunday Of Advent

Epistle.
_Romans_ xv. 4, 13.
_Brethren:_ What things soever were written, were written
for our learning, that through patience and the comfort of the
scriptures we might have hope. Now the God of patience and of
comfort grant you to be of one mind one towards another,
according to Jesus Christ; that with one mind, and with one
mouth, you may glorify God and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Wherefore receive one another, as Christ also hath
received you unto the honour of God. For I say that Christ Jesus
was minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm
the promises made unto the fathers. But that the Gentiles are to
glorify God for his mercy, as it is written: "Therefore, will I
confess to thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles, and will sing to thy
name." And again, he saith: "Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his
people." And again: "Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and magnify
him all ye people." And again Isaiah saith: "There shall be a
root of Jesse, and he that shall rise up to rule the Gentiles, in
him the Gentiles shall hope." Now the God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope, and
in the power of the Holy Ghost.


Gospel.
_Matt_. xi. 2, 10.
_At that time_: When John had heard in prison the works of
Christ, sending two of his disciples he said to him: Art thou he
that art to come, or look we for another? And Jesus making
answer, said to them: Go and relate to John what you have heard
and seen. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,
the deaf hear, the dead rise again, the poor have the gospel
preached to them; and blessed is he that shall not be scandalized
in me.
{390}
And when they went their way, Jesus began to say to the
multitude, concerning John: What went ye out into the desert to
see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out to see? A
man clothed in soft garments? Behold, they that are clothed in
soft garments are in the houses of kings. But what went ye out to
see? A prophet? Yea, I tell you, and more than a prophet. For
this is he of whom it is written: "Behold, I send my angel before
thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee." Credo.


             Third Sunday Of Advent.

Epistle.
_Philip_ iv. 4, 7.
_Brethren_: Rejoice in the Lord always; again, I say,
rejoice. Let your modesty be known to all men. The Lord is nigh.
Be nothing solicitous: but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known
to God. And the peace of God, which surpasseth all understanding,
keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.


Gospel.
_John_ i. 19, 28.
_At that time:_ The Jews sent from Jerusalem Priests and
Levites to John, to ask him: Who art thou? And he confessed, and
did not deny; and he confessed: I am not the Christ. And they
asked him: What then? Art thou Elias? And he said: I am not. Art
thou a prophet? And he answered: No. They said therefore unto
him: Who art thou, that we may give an answer to them that sent
us? What sayest thou of thyself? He said: "I am the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, _Make straight the way of the
Lord_," as said the prophet Isaias. And they that were sent
were of the Pharisees. And they asked him and said to him: Why
then dost thou baptize, if thou be not Christ, nor Elias, nor the
prophet? John answered them, saying: I baptize with water; but
there hath stood one in the midst of you, whom you know not. The
same is he that shall come after me, who is preferred before me;
the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose. These things
were done in Bethania beyond the Jordan, where John was
baptizing.--Credo.

{391}

             Fourth Sunday Of Advent.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ iv. 1, 6.
_Brethren:_ Let a man so account of us as of the ministers
of Christ, and the dispensers of the mysteries of God. Here now
it is required amongst the dispensers that a man be found
faithful. But to me it is a very small thing to be judged by you,
or by man's day: but neither do I judge my own self. For I am not
conscious to myself of any thing: yet I am not hereby justified;
but he that judgeth me is the Lord. Therefore judge not before
the time till the Lord come; who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsel of
hearts: and then shall every man have praise from God.


Gospel.
_Luke_ iii. 1, 6.
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Cæsar (Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod Tetrarch of Galilee,
and Philip his brother Tetrarch of Iturea and the country of
Trachonitis, and Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilana, under the high
priests Annas and Caiphas) the word of the Lord came to John, the
son of Zachary, in the desert. And he came into all the country
about the Jordan, preaching the baptism of penance for the
remission of sins, as it was written in the book of the words of
Isaias the prophet: "A voice of one crying in the wilderness:
prepare ye the way of the Lord: make straight his paths: every
valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the
rough ways plain:" and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.
Credo.

{392}

                 Christmas Day.
             First Mass. At Midnight.

Epistle.
_Titus_ ii. 11, 15.
_Dearly beloved:_ The grace of God our Saviour hath appeared
to all men. Instructing us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
desires, we should live soberly, and justly, and godly, in this
world, looking for the blessed hope, and coming of the glory of
the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ: who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might cleanse
to himself a people acceptable, a pursuer of good works. These
things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no
man despise thee.


Gospel.
_Luke_ ii. 1, 14.
And it came to pass that in those days there went out a decree
from Cæsar Augustus, that the whole world should be enrolled.
This enrolling was first made by Cyrinus the governor of Syria.
And all went to be enrolled, every one into his own city. And
Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the city of Nazareth into
Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem: because
he was of the house and family of David, to be enrolled with Mary
his espoused wife, who was with child. And it came to pass, that
when they were there, her days were accomplished, that she should
be delivered. And she brought forth her first-born son, and
wrapped him up in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger,
because there was no room for them in the inn. And there were in
the same country shepherds watching and keeping the night watches
over their flock. And behold an angel of the Lord stood by them,
and the brightness of God shone round about them, and they feared
with a great fear. And the angel said to them: Fear not: for
behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, that shall be to
all the people: for this day is born to you a Saviour, who is
Christ the Lord, in the city of David. And this shall be a sign
unto you: you shall find the infant wrapped in swaddling clothes,
and laid in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a
multitude of the heavenly army, praising God, and saying: Glory
to God in the highest; and on earth peace to men of good-will.
Credo.

{393}

           Second Mass. At Break Of Day.

Epistle.
_Titus_ iii. 4, 7.
_Most dearly beloved:_ The goodness and kindness of God our
Saviour appeared: not by the works of justice, which we have
done, but according to his mercy, he saved us, by the laver of
regeneration, and renovation of the Holy Ghost, whom he hath
poured forth upon us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our
Saviour: that being justified by his grace, we may be heirs
according to hope of life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.


Gospel.
_Luke_ ii. 15, 20.
_At that time:_ The shepherds said one to another: Let us go
over to Bethlehem, and let us see this word that has come to pass
which the Lord hath showed to us. And they came with haste: and
they found Mary and Joseph, and the infant lying in a manger. And
seeing, they understood of the word that had been spoken to them
concerning this child. And all that heard wondered: and at those
things that were told them by the shepherds. But Mary kept all
these words, pondering _them_ in her heart. And the
shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God, for all the
things they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them. Credo.


            Third Mass. In The Day Time.

Epistle.
_Hebrews_ i. 1, 12.
God, who at sundry times, and in divers manners spoke in times
past to the fathers by the prophets, last of all, in these days,
hath spoken to us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all
things, by whom also he made the world: who being the brightness
of his glory, and the figure of his substance, and upholding all
things by the word of his power, making purgation of sins,
sitteth on the right hand of the majesty on high: being made so
much better than the angels, as he hath inherited a more
excellent name than they.
{394}
For to which of the angels hath he said at any time, "Thou art my
Son, to-day have I begotten thee?" And again: "I will be to him a
father, and he shall be to me a Son?" And again, when he bringeth
in the first-begotten into the world, he saith: "And let all the
angels of God adore him." And to the angels indeed he saith: "He
that maketh his angels spirits: and his ministers a flame of
fire." But to the Son: "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever:
a sceptre of justice is the sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou hast
loved justice and hated iniquity: therefore God, thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." And:
"Thou, in the beginning, O Lord, didst found the earth: and the
works of thy hands are the heavens. They shall perish, but thou
shalt continue: and they shall all grow old as a garment. And as
a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the self-same and thy years shall not fail."


Gospel.
_John_ i. 14.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things
were made by him, and without him was made nothing that was made.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men; and the light
shineth in darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. This man came
for a witness, to give testimony of the light, that all men might
believe through him. He was not the light, but was to give
testimony of the light. That was the true light which
enlighteneth every man that cometh into this world.
{395}
He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be made the
sons of God; to them that believe in his name, who are born not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God. And _the word was made flesh_, and dwelt among
us; and we saw his glory, as it were the glory of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.



     Sunday Within The Octave Of Christmas.

Epistle.
_Galatians_ iv. 1, 7.
_Brethren_: As long as the heir is a child, he differeth
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all: but is under
tutors and governors, until the time appointed by the father. So
we also, when we were children, were serving under the elements
of the world. But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent
his Son, made of a woman, made under the law: that he might
redeem them who were under the law; that we might receive the
adoption of sons. And because you are sons, God hath sent the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying: Abba, Father.
Therefore now he is not a servant, but a son. And if a son, an
heir also through God.


Gospel.
_Luke_ ii. 33, 40.
_At that time:_ Joseph, and Mary the mother of Jesus, were
wondering at those things which were spoken concerning him. And
Simon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother: Behold the child
is set for the fall, and for the resurrection of many in Israel,
and for a sign which shall be contradicted. And thy own soul a
sword shall pierce, that out of many hearts thoughts may be
revealed. And there was one Anna a prophetess, the daughter of
Phanuel, of the tribe of Asar; she was far advanced in years, and
had lived with her husband seven years from her virginity.
{396}
And she was a widow until fourscore and four years; who departed
not from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving day and
night. Now she at the same hour coming in, confessed to the Lord;
and spoke of him to all that looked for the redemption of Israel.
And after they had performed all things according to the law of
the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their city Nazareth. And
the child grew and waxed strong, full of wisdom; and the grace of
God was in him.


               The Circumcision.

Epistle.
_Titus_ ii. 11, 15.
_Dearly beloved:_ The grace of God our Saviour hath appeared
to all men. Instructing us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
desires, we should live soberly, and justly, and godly, in this
world, looking for the blessed hope, and coming of the glory of
the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ: who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might cleanse
to himself a people acceptable, a pursuer of good works. These
things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no
man despise thee.


Gospel.
_Luke_ ii. 21.
_At that time:_ After eight days were accomplished that the
child should be circumcised, his name was called Jesus, which was
called by the angel, before he was conceived in the womb. Credo.


                 The Epiphany.

Lesson.
_Isaias_ lx. 1, 9.
Arise, be enlightened, O Jerusalem; for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold darkness
shall cover the earth, and a mist the people: but the Lord shall
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the
Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings in the brightness of
thy rising.
{397}
Lift up thy eyes round about and see: all these are gathered
together, they are come to thee; thy sons shall come from afar,
and thy daughters shall rise up at thy side. Then shalt thou see
and abound, and thy heart shall wonder and be enlarged, when the
multitude of the sea shall be converted to thee, the strength of
the Gentiles shall come to thee. The multitude of camels shall
cover thee, the dromedaries of Madian and Epha: all they from
Saba shall come, bringing gold and frankincense, and showing
forth praise to the Lord.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ ii. 1, 12.
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Juda, in the days of king
Herod, behold there came wise men from the east, to Jerusalem,
saying: "Where is he that is born King of the Jews? For we have
seen his star in the east, and are come to adore him." And Herod
hearing this was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. And
assembling together all the chief priests and the scribes of the
people, he inquired of them where Christ should be born, but they
said to him, "In Bethlehem of Juda." For so it is written by the
prophet: "And thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the
least among the princes of Juda; for out of thee shall come forth
the captain that shall rule my people Israel." Then Herod
privately calling the wise men, learned diligently of them the
time of the star which appeared to them; and sending them into
Bethlehem, said: "Go, and diligently inquire after the child; and
when you have found him, bring me word again, that I also may
come and adore him." Who, having heard the king, went their way;
and behold the star which they had seen in the east went before
them, until it came and stood over where the child was. And
seeing the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And
entering into the house, they found the child with Mary his
mother, and falling down they adored him; and opening their
treasures, they offered him gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
And having received an answer in sleep that they should not
return to Herod, they went back another way into their own
country. Credo.

{398}

          First Sunday After Epiphany.

Epistle.
_Romans_ xii. 1, 5.
_Brethren:_ I beseech you, by the mercy of God, that you
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing unto God,
your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world: but
be reformed in the newness of your mind, that you may prove what
is the good, and the acceptable, and the perfect will of God. For
I say, by the grace that is given me, to all that are among you,
not to be more wise than it behoveth to be wise, but to be wise
unto sobriety, and according as God hath divided to every one the
measure of faith. For as in one body we have many members, but
all the members have not the same office; so we, being many, are
one body in Christ, and every one members of one another, in
Jesus Christ our Lord.


Gospel.
_Luke_ ii. 42, 52.
When Jesus was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem
according to the custom of the feast. And having fulfilled the
days, when they returned, the child Jesus remained in Jerusalem,
and his parents knew it not. And thinking that he was in the
company, they came a day's journey, and sought him among their
kinsfolks and acquaintance. And not finding him, they returned
into Jerusalem seeking him. And it came to pass, that after three
days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the
doctors, hearing them, and asking them questions. And all that
heard him were astonished at his wisdom and his answers. And
seeing him they wondered. And his mother said to him: Son, why
hast thou done so to us? Behold thy father and I have sought thee
sorrowing. And he said to them: How is it that you sought me? Did
you not know that I must be about my Father's business? And they
understood not the word that he spoke unto them. And he went down
with them, and came to Nazareth; and was subject to them. And his
mother kept all those words in her heart. And Jesus advanced in
wisdom, and age, and grace with God and men. Credo.

{399}

          Second Sunday After Epiphany.

Lesson.
_Acts_ iv. 8, 12.
_In those days:_ Peter being filled with the Holy Ghost,
said to them: Ye princes of the people and ancients, hear: If we
this day are examined concerning the good deed done to the infirm
man, by what means he hath been made whole, be it known to you
all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God hath
raised from the dead, even by him this man standeth here before
you whole. "This is the stone which was rejected by you the
builders, which is become the head of the corner;" neither is
there salvation in any other. For there is no other name under
heaven given to men whereby we must be saved.


Gospel.
_Luke_ ii. 33, 40.
_At that time:_ Joseph, and Mary the mother of Jesus, were
wondering at those things which were spoken concerning him. And
Simon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother: Behold the child
is set for the fall, and for the resurrection of many in Israel,
and for a sign which shall be contradicted. And thy own soul a
sword shall pierce, that out of many hearts thoughts may be
revealed. And there was one Anna a prophetess, the daughter of
Phanuel, of the tribe of Asar; she was far advanced in years, and
had lived with her husband seven years from her virginity. And
she was a widow until fourscore and four years; who departed not
from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving day and night.
Now she at the same hour coming in, confessed to the Lord; and
spoke of him to all that looked for the redemption of Israel. And
after they had performed all things according to the law of the
Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their city Nazareth. And the
child grew and waxed strong, full of wisdom; and the grace of God
was in him.

{400}

          Third Sunday After Epiphany.

Epistle.
_Romans_ xii. 16.
_Brethren:_ Be not wise in your own conceits. To no man
rendering evil for evil. Providing good things not only in the
sight of God, but also in the sight of all men. If it be
possible, as much as in you, having peace with all men. Not
revenging yourselves, my dearly beloved, but give place unto
wrath. For it is written: "Revenge to me, I will repay," saith
the Lord. But "if thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat: if he
thirst, give him to drink: for doing this, thou shalt heap coals
of fire on his head. Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil
by good."


Gospel.
_Matthew_ viii. 1, 13.
_At that time:_ When Jesus was come down from the mountain,
great multitudes followed him; and behold a leper came and adored
him, saying: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And
Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying: I will, be
thou made clean. And forthwith his leprosy was cleansed. And
Jesus saith to him: See thou tell no man, but go show thyself to
the priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded for a
testimony unto them. * And when he had entered into Capharnaum,
there came to him a centurion, beseeching him, and saying: Lord,
my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, and is grievously
tormented. And Jesus saith to him: I will come and heal him. And
the centurion making answer, said: Lord, I am not worthy that
thou shouldst enter under my roof; but only say the word, and my
servant shall be healed.
{401}
For I also am a man under authority, having under me soldiers;
and I say to this, Go, and he goeth, and to another, Come, and he
cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. And when
Jesus heard this, he marvelled, and said to them that followed
him: Amen, I say to you, I have not found so great faith in
Israel. And I say unto you, that many shall come from the east
and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; but the children of the kingdom
shall be cast out into the exterior darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus said to the centurion:
Go, and as thou hast believed, so be it done to thee. And the
servant was healed at the same hour. Credo.


           Fourth Sunday After Epiphany.

Epistle.
_Romans_ xiii. 8, 10.
_Brethren:_ Owe no man any things, but to love one another;
for he that loveth his neighbour, hath fulfilled the law. For
"Thou shalt not commit adultery: Thou shalt not kill: Thou shalt
not steal: Thou shalt not bear false witness: Thou shalt not
covet and if there be any other commandment, it is comprised in
this word: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." The love of
our neighbour worketh no evil. Love, therefore, is the fulfilling
of the law.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ viii. 23, 27.
_At that time:_ When Jesus entered into a boat his disciples
followed him; and behold a great tempest arose in the sea, so
that the ship was covered with waves; but he was asleep. And his
disciples came to him, and awakened him, saying: Lord, save us,
we perish. And Jesus saith to them: Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? Then rising up, he commanded the winds and the sea,
and there came a great calm. But the men wondered, saying: What
manner of man is this, for the winds and the sea obey him? Credo.

{402}

           Fifth Sunday After Epiphany.

Epistle.
_Colossians_ iii. 12, 17.
_Brethren:_ Put ye on therefore as the elect of God, holy,
and beloved, the bowels of mercy, benignity, humility, modesty,
patience; bearing with one another, and forgiving one another, if
any have a complaint against another. Even as the Lord hath
forgiven you, so you also. But above all these things have
charity, which is the bond of perfection; and let the peace of
Christ rejoice in your hearts, wherein also you are called in one
body; and be ye thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you
abundantly, in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another
in psalms, hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing in grace in
your hearts to God. All whatsoever you do in word or in work, do
all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God
and the Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xiii. 24, 30.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke this parable to the multitude,
saying: The kingdom of heaven is likened to a man that sowed good
seed in his field. But while men were asleep, his enemy came and
oversowed cockle among the wheat, and went his way. And when the
blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared also
the cockle. Then the servants of the good man of the house came
and said to him: Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field?
from whence then hath it cockle? And he said to them: An enemy
hath done this. And the servants said to him: Wilt thou that we
go and gather it up? And he said: No, lest while you gather up
the cockle, you root up the wheat also together with it. Let both
grow until the harvest, and in the time of the harvest I will say
to the reapers: Gather up first the cockle, and bind it in
bundles to burn, but gather the wheat into my barn.

{403}

            Sixth Sunday After Epiphany.

Epistle.
1 _Thessalonians_ i. 2, 10.
_Brethren:_ We give thanks to God always for you all; making
a remembrance of you in our prayers without ceasing; being
mindful of you in the work of your faith, and hope, and charity,
and of the enduring of the hope of our lord Jesus Christ, before
God and our Father; knowing, brethren beloved of God, your
election. For our gospel hath not been to you in word only, but
in power also, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much fulness, as you
know what manner of men we have been among you for your sakes.
And you became followers of us, and of the Lord, receiving the
word in much tribulation, with joy of the Holy Ghost; so that you
were made a pattern to all that believe in Macedonia and in
Achaia. For from you was spread abroad the word of the Lord, not
only in Macedonia and in Achaia, but also in every place your
faith, which is towards God, is gone forth, so that we need not
to speak any thing. For they themselves relate of us, what manner
of entering in we had unto you; and how you turned to God from
idols, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son
from heaven (whom he raised up from the dead) Jesus, who hath
delivered us from the wrath to come.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xiii 31, 35.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to the multitude this parable:
The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard-seed, which a
man took and sowed in his field. Which indeed is the least of all
seeds; but when it is grown up, it is greater than all herbs, and
becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and dwell in
the branches thereof. Another parable he spoke to them: The
kingdom of heaven is like to leaven, which a woman took and hid
in three measures of meal, until the whole was leavened.
{404}
All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the multitudes, and
without parables he did not speak to them; that the word might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying: "I will open
my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden from the
foundation of the world." Credo.


  If there be not VI. Sundays between the Epiphany and
  Septuagesima, what remain are omitted, and taken in between the
  XXIII. and the last Sunday after Pentecost.


              Septuagesima Sunday.

Epistle,
1 _Corinthians_ ix. 24, _and_ x. 1.
_Brethren:_ Know you not that they that run in the race, all
run indeed, but one receiveth the prize? So run that you may
obtain. And every one that striveth for the mastery, refraineth
himself from all things; and they indeed that they may receive a
corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible one. I therefore so
run, not as an uncertainty: I so fight, not as one beating the
air: but I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection: lest
perhaps when I have preached to others, I myself should become a
castaway. [_Chap_. x. 1, 6.] For I would not have you
ignorant, brethren, that our fathers were all under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea. And all in Moses were baptized in
the cloud, and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual
food: and all drank the same spiritual drink: (and they drank of
the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.)
But with the most of them God was not well pleased.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xx. 1, 16.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable:
The kingdom of heaven is like to a householder who went out early
in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard. And when
having agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent them
into his vineyard. And going out about the third hour, he saw
others standing in the market place idle. And he said to them: Go
you also into my vineyard, and I will give you what shall be
just.
{405}
And they went their way. And again he went out about the sixth
and the ninth hour, and did in like manner. But about the
eleventh hour he went out and found others standing, and he saith
to them: Why stand you here all the day idle? They say to him:
Because no man hath hired us. He saith to them: Go you also into
my vineyard. And when evening was come, the lord of the vineyard
said to his steward: Call the labourers and pay them their hire,
beginning from the last even to the first. When therefore they
were come, that came about the eleventh hour, they received every
man a penny. But when the first also came, they thought that they
should have received more: and they also received every man a
penny. And receiving it they murmured against the master of the
house, saying: These last have worked but one hour, and thou hast
made them equal to us that have borne the burden of the day, and
the heats. But he answering said to one of them, Friend, I do
thee no wrong: didst thou not agree with me for a penny? Take
what is thine and go thy way: I will also give to this last even
as to thee. Or, is it not lawful for me to do what I will? Is thy
eye evil, because I am good? So shall the last be first, and the
first last. For many are called, but few chosen. Credo.


                Sexagesima Sunday.

Epistle.
2 _Corinthians_ xi. 19, 33.
_Brethren:_ You gladly suffer the foolish: whereas
yourselves are wise, For you suffer if a man bring you into
bondage, if a man devour _you_, if a man take _from
you_, if a man be lifted up, if a man strike you on the face.
I speak according to dishonour, as if we had been weak in this
part. Wherein if any man dare (I speak foolishly) I dare also.
They are Hebrews: so am I. They are Israelites: so am I. They are
the seed of Abraham: so am I.
{406}
They are the ministers of Christ (I speak as one less wise) I am
more: in many more labours, in prisons more frequently, in
stripes above measure, in deaths often. Of the Jews five times
did I receive forty stripes, save one. Thrice was I beaten with
rods, once I was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and
a day I was in the depth of the sea. In journeying often, in
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils from my own
nation, in perils from the Gentiles, in perils in the city, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils from
false brethren. In labour and gainfulness, in much watchings, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.
Besides these things which are without; my daily instance, the
solicitude for all the churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak?
Who is scandalized, and I am not on fire? If I must needs glory,
I will glory of the things that concern my infirmity. The God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for ever, knoweth
that I lie not. At Damascus the governor of the nation under
Aretas the king, guarded the city of the Damascenes, to apprehend
me; and through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall,
and so escaped his hands. [_Chap_. xii. 1.] If I must glory,
(it is not expedient indeed,) but I will come to the visions and
revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ about fourteen
years ago, (whether in the body, I know not, or out of the body,
I know not, God knoweth,) such a one rapt even to the third
heaven. And I know such a man (whether in the body, or out of the
body, I cannot tell, God knoweth) how he was caught up into
paradise, and heard secret words, which is not granted to man to
utter. For such a one I will glory; but for myself I will glory
nothing, but in my infirmities. For though I should have a mind
to glory, I shall not be foolish: for I will say the truth. But I
forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he
seeth in me, or any thing he heareth from me.
{407}
And lest the greatness of the revelations should lift me up,
there was given me a string of my flesh, an angel of Satan, to
buffet me. For which thing I thrice besought the Lord, that it
might depart from me: and he said to me: My grace is sufficient
for thee: for power is made perfect in infirmity. Gladly,
therefore, will I glory in my infirmities, that the power of
Christ may dwell in me.


Gospel.
_Luke_ viii. 4, 16.
_At that time:_ When a very great multitude was gathered
together, and hastened out of the cities to meet Jesus, he spoke
by a similitude. A sower went out to sow his seed; and as he
sowed, some fell by the way-side, and it was trodden down, and
the fowls of the air devoured it. And other some fell upon a
rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because
it had no moisture. And other some fell among thorns; and the
thorns growing up with it, choked it. And other some fell upon
good ground, and sprung up, and yielded fruit a hundred-fold.
Saying these things he cried out: He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear. And his disciples asked him what this parable might be.
To whom he said: To you it is given to know the mystery of the
kingdom of God; but to the rest in parables: that seeing they may
not see, and hearing they may not understand. Now the parable is
this: The seed is the word of God. And they by the way-side, are
they that hear; then the devil cometh, and taketh the word out of
their hearts, lest believing they should be saved. Now they upon
the rock are they, who, when they hear, receive the word with
joy; and these have no roots; for they believe for a while, and
in time of temptation fall away. And that which fell among
thorns, are they who have heard, and going their way, are choked
with the cares and the riches and pleasures of this life, and
yield no fruit. But that on the good ground, are they, who in a
good and perfect heart, hearing the word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit in patience.

{408}

              Quinquagesima Sunday.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ xiii. 1, 13.
_Brethren:_ If I speak with the tongues of men and of
angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. And if I should have prophecy, and should know
all mysteries, and all knowledge, and if I should have all faith,
so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing. And if I should distribute all my goods to feed the
poor, and if I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity is patient, is kind.
Charity envieth not, dealeth not perversely; it is not puffed up,
it is not ambitious, seeketh not her own, is not provoked to
anger, thinketh no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth
with the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth
all things, endureth all things. Charity never falleth away;
whether prophecies shall be made void, or tongues shall cease, or
knowledge shall be destroyed. For we know in part, and we
prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect is come, that
which is in part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spoke
as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but
when I became a man, I put away the things of a child. We now see
through a glass in a dark manner; but then face to face. Now I
know in part; but then I shall know even as I am known. And now
there remain faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest
of these is charity.



Gospel.
_Luke_ xviii. 31, 43.
_At that time:_ Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said to
them: Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be
accomplished which were written by the prophets concerning the
Son of Man. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall
be mocked, and scourged, and spit upon; and after they have
scourged him, they will put him to death, and the third day he
shall rise again. And they understood none of these things.
{409}
And this word was hid from them, and they understood not the
things that were said. Now it came to pass, that when he drew
nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way-side,
begging. And when he heard the multitude passing by, he asked
what this meant. And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was
passing by. And he cried out: Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on
me. And they that went before, rebuked him, that he should hold
his peace. But he cried out much more: Son of David, have mercy
on me. And Jesus, standing, commanded him to be brought unto him.
And when he was come near, he asked him, saying: What wilt thou
that I do to thee? But he said: Lord, that I may see. And Jesus
said to him: Receive thy sight; thy faith hath made thee whole.
And immediately he saw, and followed him, glorifying God. And all
the people, when they saw it, gave praise to God. Credo.


                  Ash-Wednesday.

Lesson.
_Joel_ ii. 12, 19.
Thus saith the Lord: Be converted to me with all your heart, in
fasting, in weeping, and in mourning. And rend your hearts, and
not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God; for he is
gracious and merciful, patient and rich in mercy, and ready to
repent of the evil. Who knoweth but he will return, and forgive,
and leave a blessing behind him; sacrifice and libation to the
Lord your God? Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly, gather together the people, sanctify the church,
assemble the ancients, gather together the little ones, and them
that suck at the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth from his
bed, and the bride out of the bride-chamber. Between the porch
and the altar, the priests, the Lord's ministers, shall weep, and
shall say: Spare, O Lord, spare thy people; and give not thine
inheritance to reproach, that the heathens should rule over them.
{410}
Why should they say among the nations: Where is their God? The
Lord hath been zealous for his land, and hath spared his people.
And the Lord answered and said to his people: Behold I will send
you corn, and wine, and oil; you shall be filled with them, and I
will no more make you a reproach among the nations, saith the
Lord Almighty.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ vi. 16, 21.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: When you fast,
be not, as the hypocrites, sad. For they disfigure their faces,
that they may appear to men to fast. Amen, I say to you, they
have received their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint
thy head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not to men to fast,
but to thy Father, who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in
secret, will reward thee. Lay not up for yourselves treasures on
earth, where the rust and moth consume, and where thieves break
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven,
where neither rust nor moth doth consume, and where thieves do
not break through, nor steal. For where thy treasure is, there is
thy heart also.


               First Sunday In Lent.

Epistle.
2 _Corinthians_ vi. 1, 10.
_Brethren:_ We exhort you, that you receive not the grace of
God in vain. For he saith: "In an acceptable time have I heard
thee; and in the day of salvation have I helped thee." Behold,
now is the acceptable time: behold, now is the day of salvation.
Giving no offence to any man, that our ministry be not blamed:
but in all things let us exhibit ourselves as the ministers of
God, in much patience, in tribulation, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in prison, in seditions, in labours, in
watchings, in fastings, in chastity, in knowledge, in
long-suffering, in sweetness, in the Holy Ghost, in charity
unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God; by the
armour of justice on the right hand, and on the left: by honour,
and dishonour: by evil report, and good report: as deceivers, and
yet true: as unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold we
live: as chastised, and not killed: as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing: as needy, yet enriching many: as having nothing, and
possessing all things.

{411}

Gospel.
_Matthew_ iv. 1, 11.
_At that time:_ Jesus was led by the spirit into the desert,
to be tempted by the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and
forty nights, he was afterwards hungry. And the tempter coming,
said to him, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones
be made bread. But he answered and said: It is written, "Not by
bread alone doth man live, but by every word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of God." Then the devil took him into the holy city,
and set him upon a pinnacle of the temple, and said to him: If
thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down; for it is written, "He
hath given his angels charge over thee, and in their hands shall
they bear thee up, lest perhaps thou dash thy foot against a
stone." Jesus said to him: It is written again, "Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God." Again the devil took him up into a very
high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and
the glory of them, and said to him: All these will I give thee,
if thou wilt fall down and adore me. Then Jesus said to him:
Begone, Satan; for it is written, "The Lord thy God shalt thou
adore, and him only shalt thou serve." Then the devil left him;
and behold angels came and ministered to him.--Credo.


               Second Sunday In Lent.

Epistle.
1 _Thessalonians_, iv. 1, 7.
_Brethren:_ We pray and beseech you in the Lord Jesus, that
as you have received of us, how you ought to walk and to please
God, so also you would walk, that you may abound the more.
{412}
For you know what precepts I have given to you by the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, your sanctification; that you should
abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how
to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour, not in the
passion of lust, like the Gentiles that know not God; and that no
man over-reach nor circumvent his brother in business; because
the Lord is the avenger of all these things, as we have told you
before, and have testified. For God hath not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto sanctification.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xvii. 1, 9.
_At that time:_ Jesus taketh unto him Peter and James, and
John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain
apart: and he was transfigured before them. And his face did
shine as the sun: and his garments became white as snow. And
behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias talking with him.
Then Peter answering, said to Jesus: Lord, it is good for us to
be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles, one
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. And as he was yet
speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them. And lo, a
voice out of the cloud, saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased; hear ye him. And the disciples hearing, fell
upon their face, and were very much afraid. And Jesus came and
touched them, and said unto them: Arise, and be not afraid. And
when they lifted up their eyes, they saw no one, but only Jesus.
And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them,
saying: Tell the vision to no man, till the Son of man shall be
risen from the dead. Credo.


               Third Sunday In Lent.

Epistle.
_Ephesians_ v. 1, 9.
_Brethren:_ Be ye
therefore followers of God, as most dear children; and walk in
love, as Christ also loved us, and hath delivered himself for us,
an oblation and a sacrifice to God, for an odour of sweetness.
{413}
But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not
so much as be named among you, as becometh saints; or obscenity,
or foolish talking, or scurrility, which is to no purpose: but
rather giving of thanks. For know ye this, and understand, that
no fornicator, or unclean or covetous person, (which is serving
of idols,) hath inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Let no man deceive you with vain words. For because of these
things cometh the anger of God upon the children of unbelief. Be
ye not therefore partakers with them. For you were heretofore
darkness, but now light in the Lord. Walk ye as children of the
light. For the fruit of the light is in all goodness, and
justice, and truth.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xi. 14, 28.
_At that time:_ Jesus was casting out a devil, and the same
was dumb; and when he had cast out the devil, the dumb spoke, and
the multitude were in admiration at it. But some of them said: He
casteth out devils, by Belzebub, the prince of devils. And
others, tempting, asked of him a sign from heaven. But he seeing
their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom divided against
itself, shall be brought to desolation, and house upon house
shall fall. And if Satan also be divided against himself, how
shall his kingdom stand? because you say, that through Belzebub I
cast out devils. Now, if I cast out devils by Belzebub, by whom
do your children cast them out? Therefore they shall be your
judges. But if I by the finger of God cast out devils, doubtless
the kingdom of God is come upon you. When a strong man armed
keepeth his court, those things are in peace which he possesseth.
But if a stronger than he come upon him, and overcome him, he
will take away all his armour wherein he trusted, and will
distribute his spoils. He that is not with me is against me: and
he that gathereth not with me, scattereth. When the unclean
spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through places without
water, seeking rest; and not finding, he saith: I will return
into my house whence I came out.
{414}
And when he is come, he findeth it swept and garnished. Then he
goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, and entering in they dwell there; and the last state of
that man becometh worse than the first. And it came to pass, as
he spoke these things, a certain woman from the crowd, lifting up
her voice, said to him: Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and
the paps that gave thee suck. But he said: Yea rather, blessed
are they who hear the word of God, and keep it. Credo.


              Fourth Sunday In Lent.

Epistle.
_Galatians_ iv. 22, 31.
_Brethren:_ It is written that Abraham had two sons; the one
by a bond-woman, and the other by a free-woman. But he who was of
the bond-woman, was born according to the flesh; but he by the
free-woman, was by promise. Which things are said by an allegory.
For these are the two testaments. The one from Mount Sina,
engendering unto bondage, which is Agar; for Sina is a mountain
in Arabia, which hath affinity to that Jerusalem which now is,
and is in bondage with her children. But that Jerusalem, which is
above, is free; which is our mother. For it is written: Rejoice,
thou barren, that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that
travailest not; for many are the children of the desolate, more
than of her that hath a husband. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was,
are the children of promise. But as then, he that was born
according to the flesh, persecuted him that was after the spirit,
so also it is now. But what saith the scripture? Cast out the
bond-woman and her son; for the son of the bond-woman shall not
be heir with the son of the free-woman. So then, brethren, we are
not children of the bond-woman, but of the free; by the freedom
wherewith Christ hath made us free.

{415}

Gospel.
_John_ vi. 1, 15.
_At that time:_ Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is
that of Tiberias; and a great multitude followed him, because
they saw the miracles which he did on them that were diseased.
Jesus therefore went up into a mountain, and there he sat with
his disciples. Now the pasch, the festival day of the Jews, was
near at hand. When Jesus therefore had lifted up his eyes, and
seen that a very great multitude cometh to him, he said to
Philip: Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? And this he
said to try him, for he himself knew what he would do. Philip
answered him: Two hundred penny-worth of bread is not sufficient
for them, that every one may take a little. One of his disciples,
Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to him: There is a boy
here that hath five barley loaves, and two fishes; but what are
they among so many? Then Jesus said: Make the men sit down. Now
there was much grass in the place. The men therefore sat down, in
number about five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves; and when
he had given thanks, he distributed to them that were sat down.
In like manner also of the fishes, as much as they would; and
when they were filled, he said to his disciples: Gather up the
fragments that remain, lest they be lost. They gathered up
therefore, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the
five barley loaves, which remained over and above to them that
had eaten. Now these men, when they had seen what a miracle Jesus
had done, said: This is of a truth the prophet that is to come
into the world. Jesus therefore, when he knew that they would
come to take him by force and make him king, fled again into the
mountain himself alone. Credo.

{416}

             Passion Sunday.

Epistle.
_Hebrews_ ix. 11, 15.
_Brethren:_ Christ being come, an high priest of the good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle not made
with hands, that is, not of this creation, neither by the blood
of goats or of calves, but by his own blood, entered once into
the Holies, having obtained eternal redemption. For if the blood
of goats and of oxen, and the ashes of an heifer being sprinkled,
sanctify such as are defiled, to the cleansing of the flesh; how
much more shall the blood of Christ (who by the Holy Ghost
offered himself unspotted unto God) cleanse our conscience from
dead works to serve the living God? And therefore he is the
mediator of the New Testament; that by means of his death, for
the redemption of those transgressions which were under the
former testament, they that are called may receive the promise of
eternal inheritance.



Gospel.
_John_ viii. 46, 59.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to the multitude of the Jews:
Which of you shall convince me of sin? If I say the truth to you,
why do you not believe me? He that is of God, heareth the words
of God. Therefore you hear them not, because you are not of God.
The Jews therefore answered and said to him: Do we not say well
that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? Jesus answered: I
have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and you have
dishonoured me. But I seek not my own glory: there is one that
seeketh and judgeth. Amen, amen, I say to you: If any man keep my
word, he shall not see death for ever. The Jews therefore said:
Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the
prophets; and thou sayest: If any man keep my word, he shall not
taste death for ever. Art thou greater than our father Abraham,
who is dead? And the prophets are dead. Whom dost thou make
thyself? Jesus answered: If I glorify myself, my glory is
nothing.
{417}
It is my Father that glorifieth me, of whom you say that he is
your God; and you have not known him, but I know him. And if I
should say that I know him not, I should be like to you, a liar.
But I do know him, and do keep his word. Abraham your father
rejoiced that he might see my day: he saw it, and was glad. The
Jews then said to him: Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast
thou seen Abraham? Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you,
Before Abraham was made, I am. They took up stones therefore to
cast at him. But Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple.



                  Palm Sunday.

Epistle.
_Philippians_ ii. 5, 11.
_Brethren:_ Let this mind be in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, but emptied himself, taking the
form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and in
habit found as a man. He humbled himself, becoming obedient unto
death, even to the death of the cross. For which cause God also
hath exalted him, and hath given him a name which is above all
names; that in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of those
that are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth. And that every
tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory
of the Father.


Gospel. _The_ Passion _of our_ Lord Jesus Christ,
_according_ to Matthew xxvi. _and_ xxvii. _At that
time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: You know that after two
days shall be the pasch, and the Son of man shall be delivered up
to be crucified. Then were gathered together the chief priests
and ancients of the people into the court of the high-priest, who
was called Caiphas; and they consulted together, that by subtlety
they might apprehend Jesus, and put him to death. But they said:
Not on the festival day, lest perhaps there should be a tumult
amongst the people.
{418}
And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the
house of Simon the leper, there came to him a woman having an
alabaster-box of precious ointment, and poured it on his head as
he was at table. And the disciples seeing it, had indignation,
saying: To what purpose is this waste? For this might have been
sold for much, and given to the poor. And Jesus knowing it, said
to them: Why do you trouble this woman? For she has wrought a
good work upon me. For the poor you have always with you, but me
you have not always. For she, in pouring this ointment upon my
body, hath done it for my burial. Amen, I say to you, wheresoever
this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, that also which
she hath done, shall be told for a memory of her. Then went one
of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, to the chief
priests, and said to them: What will you give me, and I will
deliver him unto you? But they appointed him thirty pieces of
silver. And from thenceforth he sought an opportunity to betray
him. And on the first day of the Azymes the disciples came to
Jesus, saying: Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat
the pasch? But Jesus said: Go ye into the city to a certain man,
and say to him, "The Master saith, My time is near at hand. I
will keep the pasch at thy house with my disciples." And the
disciples did as Jesus appointed to them, and they prepared the
pasch. Now when it was evening, he sat down with is twelve
disciples; and whilst they were eating, he said: Amen, I say to
you, that one of you is about to betray me. And they being very
much troubled, began every one to say: Is it I, Lord? But he
answering said: He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, he
shall betray me. The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of
him; but woe to that man, by whom the Son of man shall be
betrayed. It were better for him, if that man had not been born.
{419}
And Judas, that betrayed him, answering said: Is it I,
Rabbi? He saith to him: Thou hast said it. And whilst they were
at supper, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and broke: and gave to
his disciples, and said: Take ye, and eat: This is my body. And
taking the chalice he gave thanks, and gave to them, saying:
Drink ye all of this: for this is my blood of the New Testament,
which shall be shed for many for the remission of sins. And I say
to you, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that day when I shall drink it new with you in the
kingdom of my Father. And a hymn being said, they went out into
mount Olivet. Then Jesus said to them: All you shall be
scandalized in me this night. For it is written: "I will strike
the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be dispersed." But
after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.
And Peter answering, said to him: Although all shall be
scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized. Jesus said to
him: Amen, I say to thee, that in this night, before the cock
crow, thou wilt deny me thrice. Peter saith to him: Yea, though I
should die with thee, I will not deny thee. And in like manner
said all the disciples. Then Jesus came with them into a country
place which is called Gethsemani; and he said to his disciples:
Sit you here, till I go yonder, and pray. And taking with him
Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to grow sorrowful,
and to be sad. Then he saith to them: My soul is sorrowful even
unto death; stay you here and watch with me. And going a little
further he fell upon his face, praying, and saying: My Father, if
it be possible, let this chalice pass from me. Nevertheless, not
as I will, but as thou wilt. And he cometh to his disciples and
findeth them asleep, and he said to Peter: What! could you not
watch one hour with me? Watch ye, and pray that ye enter not into
temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Again the second time he went and prayed, saying: My Father, if
this chalice may not pass away, but I must drink it, thy will be
done.
{420}
And he cometh again, and findeth them sleeping; for
their eyes were heavy. And leaving them, he went again; and he
prayed the third time, saying the self-same words. Then he cometh
to his disciples, and saith to them: Sleep ye now, and take your
rest: behold the hour is at hand, and the Son of man shall be
betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us go: behold he is
at hand that will betray me. As he yet spoke, behold Judas, one
of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords
and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the ancients of the
people. And he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying:
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, hold him fast. And forthwith
coming to Jesus, he said: Hail, Rabbi; and he kissed him. And
Jesus said to him: Friend, whereto art thou come? Then they came
up, and laid hands on Jesus, and held him. And behold one of them
that were with Jesus, stretching forth his hand, drew out his
sword; and striking the servant of the high-priest, cut off his
ear. Then Jesus said to him: Put up again thy sword into its
place; for all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.
Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me
presently more than twelve legions of angels? How then shall the
Scriptures be fulfilled, that so it must be done? In that same
hour Jesus said to the multitude: You are come out as it were to
a robber, with swords and clubs, to apprehend me. I sat daily
with you teaching in the temple, and you laid not hands on me.
Now all this was done, that the Scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. Then the disciples all leaving him, fled. But they
holding Jesus, led him to Caiphas the high-priest, where the
scribes and the ancients were assembled. And Peter followed him
afar off, even to the court of the high-priest; and going in, he
sat with the servants, that he might see the end. And the chief
priests and the whole council sought false witness against Jesus,
that they might put him to death; and they found not, whereas
many false witnesses had come in.
{421}
And last of all there
came two false witnesses; and they said: This man said, I am able
to destroy the temple of God, and after three days to rebuild it.
And the high-priest rising up, said to him: Answerest thou
nothing to the things which these witness against thee? But Jesus
held his peace. And the high-priest said to him: I adjure thee,
by the living God, that thou tell us if thou be the Christ the
Son of God. Jesus saith to him: Thou hast said it. Nevertheless I
say to you. Hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of
heaven. Then the high-priest rent his garments, saying: He hath
blasphemed, what further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now
you have heard the blasphemy: what think you? But they answering,
said: He is guilty of death. Then did they spit in his face, and
buffet him, and others struck his face with the palms of their
hands, saying: Prophesy unto us, O Christ, who is he that struck
thee? But Peter sat without in the court; and there came to him a
servant-maid, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilean. But
he denied before them all, saying: I know not what thou sayest.
And as he went out of the gate, another maid saw him, and she
saith to them that were there: This man also was with Jesus of
Nazareth. And again he denied with an oath: That I know not the
man. And after a little while they came that stood by, and said
to Peter: Surely thou also art one of them; for even thy speech,
doth discover thee. Then he began to curse and swear that he knew
not the man. And immediately the cock crew. And Peter remembered
the words of Jesus which he had said: Before the cock crow, thou
wilt deny me thrice. And going forth, he wept bitterly. And when
morning was come, all the chief priests and ancients of the
people took council against Jesus, that they might put him to
death.
{422}
And they brought him bound, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the governor. Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing
that he was condemned, repenting himself, brought back the thirty
pieces of silver to the chief priests and ancients, saying: I
have sinned, in betraying innocent blood. But they said: What is
that to us? look thou to it. And casting down the pieces of
silver in the temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself
with a halter. But the chief priests having taken the pieces of
silver, said: It is not lawful to put them into the corbona,
because it is the price of blood. And after they had consulted
together, they bought with them the potter's field, to be a
burying-place for strangers. For this cause that field was called
Haceldama, that is, the field of blood, even to this day. Then
was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
saying: "And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of
him that was prized, whom they prized of the children of Israel.
And they gave them unto the potter's field, as the Lord appointed
to me." And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor
asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus saith to
him: Thou sayest it. And when he was accused by the chief priests
and ancients, he answered nothing. Then Pilate saith to him: Dost
thou not hear how great testimonies they allege against thee? And
he answered him to never a word; so that the governor wondered
exceedingly. Now upon the solemn day the governor was accustomed
to release to the people one prisoner, whom they would. And he
had then a notorious prisoner, that was called Barabbas. They
therefore being gathered together, Pilate said: Whom will you
that I release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus that is called Christ?
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. And as he was
sitting in the place of judgment, his wife sent to him, saying:
Have thou nothing to do with that just man. For I have suffered
many things this day in a dream because of him.
{423}
But the
chief priests and ancients persuaded the people that they should
ask Barabbas, and make Jesus away. And the governor answering,
said to them: Whether will you of the two to be released unto
you? But they said, Barabbas. Pilate saith to them: what shall I
do then with Jesus that is called Christ? They say all: Let him
be crucified. The governor said to them: Why, what evil hath he
done? But they cried out the more, saying: Let him be crucified.
And Pilate seeing that he prevailed nothing, but that rather a
tumult was made; taking water he washed his hands before the
people, saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just man: look
you to it. And the whole people answering, said: His blood be
upon us, and upon our children. Then he released to them
Barabbas: and having scourged Jesus, delivered him unto them to
be crucified. Then the soldiers of the governor taking Jesus into
the hall, gathered together unto him the whole band; and
stripping him, they put a scarlet cloak about him. And platting a
crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his
right hand. And bowing the knee before him, they mocked him,
saying: Hail, king of the Jews. And spitting upon him, they took
the reed, and struck his head. And after they had mocked him,
they took off the cloak from him, and put on his own garments,
and led him away to crucify him. And going out they met a man of
Cyrene named Simon: him they forced to take up the cross. And
they came to the place that is called Golgotha, which is the
place of Calvary. And they gave him wine to drink mingled with
gall. And when he had tasted, he would not drink. And after they
had crucified him, they divided his garments, casting lots: that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying:
"They divided my garments among them; and upon my vesture they
cast lots:" and they sat and watched him. And they put over his
head his cause written: _This is Jesus the King of the
Jews._
{424}
Then were crucified with him two thieves, one on
the right hand, and one on the left. And they that passed by,
blasphemed him, wagging their heads, and saying: Vah, thou that
destroyest the temple of God, and in three days dost rebuild it,
save thy own self: if thou be the Son of God, come down from the
cross. In like manner also the chief priests, with the scribes
and ancients, mocking, said: He saved others; himself he cannot
save: if he be the king of Israel, let him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in God: let him now
deliver him, if he will have him: for he said: I am the Son of
God. And the self-same thing the thieves also that were crucified
with him, reproached him with. Now from the sixth hour there was
darkness over the whole earth until the ninth hour. And about the
ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying: Eli, Eli, lamma
sabacthani? that is, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"
And some that stood there and heard, said: This man calleth
Elias. And immediately one of them running, took a sponge, and
filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to
drink. And the others said: Let us see whether Elias will come
and deliver him. And Jesus again crying with a loud voice,
yielded up the ghost. [Here all kneel and pause.] And behold the
veil of the temple was rent in two from the top even to the
bottom, and the earth quaked, and the rocks were rent. And the
graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints that had slept
arose; and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, came
into the holy city and appeared to many. Now the centurion, and
they that were with him watching Jesus, having seen the
earthquake and the things that were done, were sore afraid,
saying: Indeed this was the Son of God. And there were there many
women afar off who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering
unto him: among whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of
James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
{425}
And when it was evening, there came a certain rich man of
Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of
Jesus. He went to Pilate, and asked the body of Jesus. Then
Pilate commanded that the body should be delivered. And Joseph
taking the body, wrapped it up in a clean linen cloth, and laid
it in his own new monument, which he had hewn out in a rock. And
he rolled a great stone to the door of the monument, and went his
way. And there was there Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary
sitting over against the sepulchre. And the next day, which
followed the day of preparation, the chief priests and the
Pharisees came together to Pilate, saying: Sir, we have
remembered, that that seducer said, while he was yet alive: After
three days I will rise again. Command therefore the sepulchre to
be guarded until the third day: lest perhaps his disciples come
and steal him away, and say to the people he is risen from the
dead: and the last error shall be worse than the first. Pilate
said to them: You have a guard; go, guard it as you know. And
they departing, made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and
setting guards.



                 Easter Sunday.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ v. 7, 8.
_Brethren:_ Purge out the old leaven, that you may be a new
paste, as you are unleavened. For Christ, our pasch, is
sacrificed. Therefore let us feast, not with the old leaven, nor
with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.


Gospel.
_Mark_ xvi. 1, 7.
_At that time:_ Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James
and Salome, brought sweet spices, that coming they might anoint
Jesus. And very early in the morning the first day of the week,
they come to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen.
{426}
And they said one to another: Who shall roll us back the stone
from the door of the sepulchre? And looking, they saw the stone
rolled back. For it was very great. And entering into the
sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right side clothed
with a white robe: and they were astonished. Who saith to them:
Be not affrighted: you seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified:
he is risen, he is not here, behold the place where they laid
him. But go, tell his disciples and Peter, that he goeth before
you into Galilee: there you shall see him, as he told you. Credo.



           Quasimodo, Or Low Sunday.

Epistle.
1 _John_ v. 4, 9.
_Dearly beloved:_ Whatsoever is born of God, overcometh the
world; and this is the victory which overcometh the world, our
faith. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth
that Jesus is the Son of God? This is he that came by water and
blood, Jesus Christ: not by water only, but by water and blood.
And it is the Spirit which testifieth, that Christ is the truth.
And there are three who give testimony in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost. And these three are one. And there are
three that give testimony on earth: the Spirit, the water, and
the blood, and these three are one. If we receive the testimony
of men, the testimony of God is greater. For this is the
testimony of God which is greater, because he hath testified of
his Son. He that believeth in the Son of God, hath the testimony
of God in himself.


Gospel.
_John_ xx. 19, 31.
_At that time:_ When it was late that same day, being the
first day of the week, and the doors were shut, where the
disciples were gathered together for fear of the Jews, Jesus came
and stood in the midst, and said to them: Peace be to you. And
when he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
{427}
The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord. He said
therefore to them again: Peace be to you. As the Father hath sent
me, I also send you. When he had said this, he breathed on them;
and he said to them: Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose sins you
shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins you shall
retain, they are retained. Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who is
called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other
disciples therefore said to him: We have seen the Lord. But he
said to them: Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the place of the nails, and put my
hands into his side, I will not believe. And after eight days,
again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them. Jesus
cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said:
Peace be to you. Then he said to Thomas: Put in thy finger
hither, and see my hands, and bring hither thy hand, and put it
into my side; and be not faithless, but believing. Thomas
answered, and said to him: My Lord and my God! Jesus said to him:
Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed: blessed
are they that have not seen, and have believed. Many other signs
also did Jesus in the sight of his disciples, which are not
written in this book. But these are written that you may believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God: and that believing you
may have life in his name. Credo.



           Second Sunday After Easter.

Epistle.
1 _Peter_ ii. 21, 25.
_Dearly beloved;_ Christ also suffered for us, leaving you
an example that you should follow his steps. _Who did no sin,
neither was guile found in is mouth_. Who when he was reviled,
did not revile: when he suffered, he threatened not: but
delivered himself to him that judged him unjustly: who his own
self bore our sins in his body upon the tree: that we being dead
to sins, should live to justice: by whose stripes you were
healed. For you were as sheep going astray: but you are now
converted to the shepherd and bishop of your souls.

{428}

Gospel.
_John_ x. 11, 16.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to the Pharisees: I am the good
shepherd. The good shepherd giveth his life for his sheep. But
the hireling, and he that is not the shepherd, whose own the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the sheep, and
flieth, and the wolf catcheth, and scattereth the sheep: and the
hireling flieth, because he is a hireling; and he hath no care
for the sheep. I am the good shepherd: and I know mine, and mine
know me. As the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father: and I
lay down my life for my sheep. And other sheep I have, that are
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice, and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. Credo.



            Third Sunday After Easter.

Epistle.
1 _Peter_ ii. 11, 19.
_Dearly beloved:_ I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims to
refrain yourselves from carnal desires, which war against the
soul, having your conversation good among the Gentiles: that
whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may, by the
good works which they shall behold in you, glorify God in the day
of visitation. Be ye subject therefore to every human creature
for God's sake: whether it be to kings as excelling: or to
governors as sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and
for the praise of the good: for so is the will of God, that by
doing well you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:
as free, and not as making liberty a cloak for malice, but as the
servants of God. Honour all men: love the brotherhood: fear God:
honour the king. Servants be subject to your masters with all
fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.
For this is thanks-worthy _in Jesus Christ our Lord_.

{429}

Gospel.
_John_ xvi. 16,22.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: A little while,
and now you shall not see me: and again a little while, and you
shall see me; because I go to the Father. Then some of his
disciples said one to another: What is it that he saith to us: A
little while, and you shall not see me: and again a little while,
and you shall see me, and because I go to the Father? They said
therefore: What is this that he saith: A little while? we know
not what he speaketh. And Jesus knew that they had a mind to ask
him; and he said to them: Of this do you inquire among
yourselves, because I said: A little while, and you shall not see
me; and again, a little while and you shall see me. Amen, amen, I
say to you, that you shall lament and weep, but the world shall
rejoice: and you shall be made sorrowful, but your sorrow shall
be turned into joy. A woman, when she is in labour, hath sorrow,
because her hour is come: but when she hath brought forth the
child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is
born into the world. So also you now indeed have sorrow, but I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice; and your joy no
man shall take from you. Credo.



           Fourth Sunday After Easter.

Epistle.
_James_ i. 17, 21.
_Dearly beloved:_ Every best gift, and every perfect gift,
is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom
there is no change, nor shadow of alteration. For of his own will
hath he begotten us by the word of truth, that we might be some
beginning of his creatures. You know, my dearest brethren. And
let every man be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to
anger. For the anger of man worketh not the justice of God.
Wherefore casting away all uncleanness, and abundance of
naughtiness, with meekness receive the ingrafted word, which is
able to save your souls.

{430}

Gospel.
_John_ xvi. 5, 15.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: I go to him
that sent me; and none of you asketh me: Whither goest thou? But
because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow hath filled
your heart. But I tell you the truth: It is expedient to you that
I go: for if I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you; but if
I go, I will send him to you. And when he is come, he will
convince the world of sin, and of justice, and of judgment. Of
sin: because they believed not in me. And of justice: because I
go to the Father; and you shall see me no longer. And of
judgment: because the prince of this world is already judged. I
have yet many things to say to you: but you cannot bear them now.
But when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will teach you all
truth. For he shall not speak of himself; but what things soever
he shall hear, he shall speak: and the things that are to come he
shall show you. He shall glorify me: because he shall receive of
mine, and shall show it you. Credo.



            Fifth Sunday After Easter.

Epistle.
_James_ i. 22, 27.
_Dearly beloved:_ Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves. For if a man be a hearer of the
word and not a doer; he shall be compared to a man beholding his
own countenance in a glass. For he beheld himself and went his
way, and presently forgot what manner of man he was. But he that
hath looked into the perfect law of liberty, and hath continued
therein, not becoming a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work:
this man shall be blessed in his deed. And if any man think
himself religious, not bridling his tongue, but deceiving his own
heart, this man's religion is vain. _Religion_ clean and
undefiled before God and the Father, is this: to visit the
fatherless and the widows in their tribulation: and to keep one's
self unspotted from the world.

{431}

Gospel.
_John_ xvi. 23, 30.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Amen, amen, I
say to you; if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will
give it you. Hitherto you have not asked any thing in my name.
Ask and you shall receive; that your joy may be full. These
things I have spoken to you in proverbs. The hour cometh when I
no more will speak to you in proverbs, but will show you plainly
of the Father. In that day you shall ask in my name: and I say
not to you, that I will ask the Father for you. For the Father
himself loveth you, because you have loved me, and have believed
that I came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am
come into the world: again I leave the world, and go to the
Father. His disciples say to him: Behold now thou speakest
plainly, and speakest no proverb. Now we know that thou knowest
all things, and thou needest not that any man should ask thee. By
this we believe that thou camest forth from God. Credo.



                Ascension-Day.

Lesson.
Acts i. 1, 11.
The former treatise, I made, O Theophilus, of all things which
Jesus began to do and to teach, until the day on which, giving
commandments by the Holy Ghost to the apostles whom he had
chosen, he was taken up. To whom also he showed himself alive
after his passion, by many proofs, by forty days appearing to
them, and speaking of the kingdom of God. And eating together
with them, he commanded them, that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but should wait for the promise of the Father, which
you have heard (saith he) by my mouth: for John indeed baptized
with water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not
many days hence.
{432}
They therefore who were come together, asked him, saying: Lord,
wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom of Israel? But
he said to them: It is not for you to know the times or moments,
which the Father hath put in his own power; but you shall receive
the power of the Holy Ghost coming upon you, and you shall be
witnesses to me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and Samaria, and
even to the uttermost part of the earth. And when he had said
these things, while they looked on, he was raised up; and a cloud
received him out of their sight. And while they were beholding
him going up to heaven, behold two men stood by them, in white
garments. Who also said: Ye men of Galilee, why stand you looking
up to heaven? This Jesus, who is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come as you have seen him going into heaven.


Gospel.
_Mark_ xvi. 14, 20.
_At that time:_ Jesus appeared to the eleven as they were at
table; and he upbraided them with their incredulity and hardness
of heart, because they did not believe them who had seen him
after he was risen again. And he said to them: Go ye into the
whole world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that
believeth and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth
not shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow them that
believe: In my name they shall cast out devils: they shall speak
with new tongues: they shall take up serpents: and if they shall
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay
hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. And the Lord Jesus,
after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and
sitteth on the right hand of God. But they going, preached every
where: the Lord working withal, and confirming the word with
signs that followed. Credo.

{433}

     Sunday Within The Octave Of The Ascension.

Epistle.
1 _Peter_ iv. 7, 11.
_Most dearly beloved:_ Be prudent, and watch in prayers. But
before all things have a constant mutual charity among
yourselves: for charity covereth a multitude of sins. Using
hospitality one towards another, without murmuring. As every man
hath received grace, ministering the same one to another: as good
stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him
speak as the words of God. If any man minister, let him do it as
of the power which God administereth; that in all things God may
be honoured through Jesus Christ; to whom is glory and empire for
ever and ever. _Amen_.


Gospel.
_John_ xv. 26. xvi. 1, 4.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: When the
Paraclete cometh whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirit
of truth, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall give testimony
of me; and you shall give testimony, because you are with me from
the beginning. These things have I spoken to you, that you may
not be scandalized. They will put you out of the synagogues; yea
the hour cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he
doeth a service to God. And these things will they do to you,
because they have not known the Father, nor me. But these things
I have told you; that when the hour shall come, you may remember
that I told you of them. Credo.



                   Whit-Sunday.

Lesson.
_Acts_ ii. 1, 11.
When the days of Pentecost were accomplished, they were all
together in one place: and suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a mighty wind coming, and it filled the whole house
where they were sitting. And there appeared to them parted
tongues as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them:
and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they began to
speak with divers tongues, according as the Holy Ghost gave them
to speak.
{434}
Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men out of
every nation under heaven. And when this was noised abroad, the
multitude came together, and were confounded in mind, because
that every man heard them speak in his own tongue. And they were
all amazed and wondered, saying: Behold, are not all these that
speak, Galileans; and how have we heard, every man our own tongue
wherein we were born? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus and
Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia, Egypt and the parts of Lybia, about
Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews also, and Proselytes, Cretes
and Arabians: we have heard them speak in our own tongues the
wonderful works of God.


Gospel.
_John_ xiv. 23. 31.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: If any one love
me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we
will come to him, and will make our abode with him: he that
loveth me not, keepeth not my words. And the word which you have
heard, is not mine: but the Father's who sent me. These things
have I spoken to you, abiding with you. But the Paraclete, the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach
you all things, and bring all things to your mind, whatsoever I
shall have said to you. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
to you: not as the world giveth, do I give unto you. Let not your
heart be troubled, nor let it be afraid. You have heard that I
said to you: I go away, and I come again to you. If you loved me,
you would indeed be glad, because I go to the Father: for the
Father is greater than I. And now I have told you before it come
to pass: that when it shall come to pass, you may believe. I will
not now speak many things with you. For the prince of this world
cometh, and in me he hath not any thing. But that the world may
know that I love the Father: and as the Father hath given me
commandment, so do I. Credo.

{435}

                 Trinity Sunday.

Epistle.
_Romans_ xi. 33, 36.
O the depth of the
riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God!
How incomprehensible are his judgments, and how
unsearchable his ways! For who hath known the mind
of the Lord? Or who hath been his counsellor? Or
who hath first given to him, and recompense shall be
made him? For of him, and by him, and in him are all
things: to him be glory for ever. Amen.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxviii. 18, 20.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: All power is
given to me in heaven and in earth. Going, therefore, teach all
nations: _Baptising them in the name op the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost._ Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and behold I am with you
all days, even to the consummation of the world. Credo.


Gospel of the First Sunday _after_ Pentecost.
_Luke_ vi. 30, 42.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Be ye merciful,
as your Father also is merciful. Judge not, and you shall not be
judged. Condemn not, and you shall not be condemned. Forgive, and
you shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be given to you; good
measure and pressed down and shaken together and running over,
shall be given into your bosom. For with the same measure that
you shall mete withal, it shall be measured to you again. And he
spoke also to them a similitude: Can the blind lead the blind? do
they not both fall into the ditch? The disciple is not above his
master: but every one shall be perfect, if he be as his master.
And why seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye; but the beam
that is in thy own eye thou considerest not? or how canst thou
say to thy brother: Brother, let me pull the mote out of thy eye,
when thou thyself seest not the beam in thy own eye? Hypocrite,
cast first the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shalt see
clearly to take out the mote from thy brother's eye. _Deo
gratias_.

{436}

                  Corpus Christi

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ xi. 23, 29.
_Brethren:_ I have received of the Lord, that which also I
delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he
was betrayed, took bread, and giving thanks, broke, and said:
_Take ye, and eat: this is my body which shall be delivered for
you: this do for the commemoration of me._ In like manner also
the chalice, after he had supped, saying: _This chalice is the
New Testament in my blood: this do ye, as often as you shall
drink it, for the commemoration of me._ For as often as you
shall eat this bread, and drink this chalice, you shall show the
death of the Lord, until he come. Therefore, whosoever shall eat
this bread or drink of the chalice of the Lord unworthily, shall
be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man prove
himself: and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of the
chalice. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and
drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the body of the
Lord.


Gospel.
_John_ vi. 56, 59.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to the multitude of the Jews: My
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that
eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, abideth in me, and I in
him. As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father;
so he that eateth me, the same also shall live by me. This is the
bread that came down from heaven. Not as your fathers did eat
manna and are dead. He that eateth this bread shall live for
ever. Credo.

{437}

               Second Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
1 _John_ iii. 13, 18.
_Dearly beloved:_ Wonder not if the world hate you. We know
that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren. He that loveth not, abideth in death. Whosoever hateth
his brother, is a murderer. And you know that no murderer hath
eternal life abiding in himself. In this we have known the
charity of God, because he hath laid down his life for us: and we
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. He that hath the
substance of this world, and shall see his brother in need, and
shut up his bowels from him: how doth the charity of God abide in
him? My little children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue,
but in deed and in truth.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xiv. 16, 24.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke this parable to the Pharisees: A
certain man made a great supper, and invited many, and he sent
his servant at the hour of supper to say to them that were
invited, that they should come, for now all things are ready. And
they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to him: I
have bought a farm, and must needs go out and see it: I pray
thee, hold me excused. And another said: I have bought five yoke
of oxen, and I go to try them: I pray thee hold me excused. And
another said: I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.
And the servant returning told these things to his lord. Then the
master of the house being angry, said to his servant: Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in
hither the poor, and the feeble, and the blind, and the lame. And
the servant said: Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and
yet there is room. And the Lord said to the servant: Go out into
the high-ways and hedges; and compel them to come in, that my
house may be filled. But I say unto you, that none of those men
that were invited, shall taste of my supper. Credo.

{438}

           Third Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
1 _Peter_ v. 6, 11.
_Dearly beloved:_ Be you humbled under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in the time of visitation. Casting all
your care upon him, for he hath care of you. Be sober and watch:
because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, goeth about,
seeking whom he may devour: whom resist ye, strong in faith;
knowing that the same affliction befalls your brethren who are in
the world. But the God of all grace, who hath called us into his
eternal glory in Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little,
will himself perfect you, and confirm and stablish you. To him be
glory and empire for ever and ever. _Amen_.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xv. 1, 10.
_At that time:_ The publicans and sinners drew near unto him
to hear him. And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying: This
man receiveth sinners and eateth with them. And he spoke to them
this parable, saying: What man of you that hath a hundred sheep,
and if he shall lose one of them, doth he not leave the
ninety-nine in the desert, and go after that which was lost until
he find it? And when he hath found it, lay it upon his shoulders
rejoicing: and coming home call together his friends and
neighbours, saying to them: Rejoice with me, because I have found
my sheep that was lost? I say to you, that even so there shall be
joy in heaven upon one sinner that doth penance, more than upon
ninety-nine just who need not penance. Or what woman having ten
groats, if she lose one groat, doth not light a candle, and sweep
the house, and seek diligently until she find it? And when she
hath found it, call together her friends and neighbours, saying:
Rejoice with me, because I have found the groat which I had lost?
So I say to you, there shall be joy before the angels of God upon
one sinner doing penance. Credo.

{439}

          Fourth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Romans_ viii. 18, 23.
_Brethren:_ I reckon that the sufferings of this time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory to come, that shall be
revealed in us. For the expectation of the creature waiteth for
the revelation of the sons of God. For the creature was made
subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that made
it subject, in hope: Because the creature also itself shall be
delivered from the servitude of corruption, into the liberty of
the glory of the children of God. For we know that every creature
groaneth and travaileth in pain even till now. And not only it,
but ourselves also, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even
we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption of
the sons of God, the redemption of our body in Christ Jesus our
Lord.


Gospel.
_Luke_ v. 1, 11.
_At that time:_
It came to pass, that when the multitude pressed upon him to hear
the word of God, he stood by the lake of Genesareth. And he saw
two ships standing by the lake; but the fishermen were gone out
of them and were washing their nets. And going up into one of the
ships that was Simon's, he desired him to draw back a little from
the land. And sitting he taught the multitudes out of the ship.
Now when he had ceased to speak, he said to Simon: Launch out
into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught. And Simon,
answering, said to him: Master, we have laboured all the night,
and have taken nothing; but at thy word I will let down the net.
And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude
of fishes, and their net broke. And they beckoned to their
partners that were in the other ship, that they should come and
help them. And they came and filled both the ships, so that they
were almost sinking.
{440}
Which when Simon Peter saw, he fell down at Jesus's knees,
saying: Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. For he was
wholly astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of
the fishes which they had taken. And so were also James and John
the sons of Zebedee, who were Simon's partners. And Jesus saith
to Simon: Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men. And
having brought their ships to land, leaving all things they
followed him. Credo.


          Fifth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
1 _Peter_ iii. 8, 15.
_Dearly beloved:_ Be ye all of one mind, having compassion
one of another, being lovers of the brotherhood, merciful,
modest, humble: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise, blessing: for unto this you are
called, that you may inherit a blessing. "For he that will love
life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him decline from evil,
and do good: let him seek after peace, and pursue it: because the
eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears unto their
prayers; but the countenance of the Lord against them that do
evil things." And who is he that can hurt you, if you be jealous
of good? But if also you suffer any thing for justice sake,
blessed are ye. And be not afraid of their fear, and be not
troubled. But sanctify the Lord Christ in your hearts.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ v. 20, 24.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Unless your
justice exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. You have heard that it was said
to them of old: Thou shalt not kill. And whosoever hall kill,
shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say to you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the
judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother, _Raca_,
shall be _in danger of_ the council. And whosoever shall
say, Thou fool, shall be _in danger of_ hell fire.
Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there shalt
remember that thy brother hath any thing against thee; leave
there thy gift before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to
thy brother: and then come and offer thy gift. Credo.

{441}

            Sixth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Romans_ vi. 3, 11.
_Brethren:_ All we who are baptized in Christ Jesus, are
baptized in his death. For we are buried together with him by
baptism unto death: that as Christ is risen from the dead by the
glory of the Father, so we also may walk in newness of life. For
if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall also be in the likeness of his resurrection. Knowing this,
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin may
be destroyed, and that we may serve sin no longer. For he that is
dead is justified from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall live also together with Christ. Knowing
that Christ, rising again from the dead, dieth now no more, death
shall no more have dominion over him. For in that he died to sin,
he died once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. So do
you also reckon yourselves to be dead indeed to sin, but alive to
God in Christ Jesus our Lord.


Gospel.
_Mark_ viii. 1, 9.
_At that time:_ When there was a great multitude with Jesus,
and had nothing to eat: calling his disciples together, he saith
to them: I have compassion on the multitude, for behold they have
now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat; and if I
send them away fasting to their own home, they will faint in the
way: for some of them came afar off. And his disciples answered
him: From whence can any one fill them here with bread in the
wilderness?
{442}
And he asked them: How many loaves have ye? Who said: Seven. And
he commanded the people to sit down on the ground; and taking the
seven loaves, giving thanks, he broke, and gave to his disciples
for to set before them, and they set them before the people. And
they had a few little fishes; and he blessed them, and commanded
them to be set before them. And they did eat and were filled, and
they took up that which was left of the fragments, seven baskets.
And they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent
them away. Credo.


          Seventh Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Romans_ vi. 19.
_Brethren:_ I speak a human thing, because of the infirmity
of your flesh: for as you have yielded your members to serve
uncleanness and iniquity unto iniquity; so now yield your members
to serve justice, unto sanctification. For when you were the
servants of sin, you were free from justice. What fruit therefore
had you then in those things of which you are now ashamed? For
the end of them is death. But now being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, you have your fruit unto sanctification,
and the end life everlasting. For the wages of sin is death; but
the grace of God, life everlasting in Christ Jesus our Lord.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ vii. 15, 21.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Beware of false
prophets, who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves. By their fruits you shall know them. Do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every
good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth
forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,
neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that
bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be
cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know
them. Not everyone that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that doth the will of my Father who is
in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Credo.

{443}

          Eighth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Romans_ viii. 12, 17.
_Brethren:_ We are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
according to the flesh. For if you live according to the flesh,
you shall die: but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the
flesh, you shall live. For whosoever are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God. For you have not received the
spirit of bondage again in fear; but you have received the spirit
of adoption of sons, whereby we cry: Abba, (Father.) For the
Spirit himself giveth testimony to our spirit, that we are the
sons of God. And if sons, heirs also: heirs indeed of God, and
joint heirs with Christ.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xvi. 1, 9.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable:
There was a certain rich man who had a steward: and the same was
accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods. And he called
him, and said to him; How is it that I hear this of thee? give an
account of thy stewardship: for now thou canst be steward no
longer. And the steward said within himself: What shall I do,
because my lord taketh away from me the stewardship? To dig I am
not able; to beg I am ashamed. I know what I will do, that when I
shall be removed from the stewardship, they may receive me into
their houses. Therefore calling together every one of his lord's
debtors, he said to the first: How much dost thou owe my lord?
But he said: A hundred barrels of oil. And he said to him: Take
thy bill and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then he said to
another: And how much dost thou owe? Who said: A hundred quarters
of wheat. He said to him: Take thy bill and write eighty. And the
lord commended the unjust steward, forasmuch as he had done
wisely: for the children of this world are wiser in their
generation, than the children of light. And I say to you: Make
unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you shall
fail, they may receive you into everlasting dwellings. Credo.

{444}

              Ninth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ x. 6, 13.
_Brethren:_ Let us not covet evil things, as they also
coveted. Neither become ye idolaters, as some of them: as it is
written: "The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play." Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them
committed fornication, and there fell in one day three-and-twenty
thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ: as some of them tempted,
and perished by the serpents. Neither do you murmur: as some of
them murmured, and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these
things happened to them in figure: and they are written for our
correction, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore
let him that thinketh himself to stand, take heed lest he fall.
Let no temptation take hold on you but such as is human. And God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
which you are able; but will make also with temptation issue,
that you may be able to bear it.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xix. 41, 47.
_At that time:_ When he drew near to Jerusalem, seeing the
city, he wept over it, saying: If thou also hadst known, and that
in this thy day, the things that are to thy peace: but now they
are hidden from thy eyes. For the days shall come upon thee: and
thy enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and straiten thee on every side, and beat thee flat to the
ground, and thy children who are in thee: and they shall not
leave in thee a stone upon a stone; because thou hast not known
the time of thy visitation. And entering into the temple, he
began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought,
saying to them: It is written: "My house is the house of prayer."
But you have made it a den of thieves. And he was teaching daily
in the temple. Credo.

{445}

           Tenth Sunday After Pentecost.

_Epistle._
1 _Corinthians_ xii. 2, 11.
_Brethren:_ You know that when you were heathens, you went
to dumb idols, according as you were led. Wherefore I give you to
understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, saith
anathema to Jesus. And no man can say the Lord Jesus, but by the
Holy Ghost. Now there are diversities of graces, but the same
spirit. And there are diversities of ministries, but the same
Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but the same God
who worketh all in all. And the manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man unto profit. To one indeed, by the Spirit, is
given the word of wisdom; and to another, the word of knowledge,
according to the same spirit; to another faith in the same
spirit; to another, the grace of healing in one spirit; to
another, the working of miracles; to another, prophecy; to
another, the discerning of spirits; to another, divers kinds of
tongues; to another, interpretation of speeches. But in all these
things, one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing to every one
according as he will.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xviii. 9, 14.
_At that time:_ Jesus spake this parable to some who trusted
in themselves as just, and despised others. Two men went up into
the temple to pray: the one was a Pharisee, and the other a
publican. The Pharisee standing, prayed thus with himself: O God,
I give thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, as also is this publican. I
fast twice in the week: I give tithes of all that I possess. And
the publican standing afar off would not so much as lift up his
eyes towards heaven: but struck his breast, saying: O God, be
merciful to me a sinner. I say to you, this man went down to his
house justified rather than the other, because every one that
exalted himself, shall be humbled; and he that humbleth himself,
shall be exalted. Credo.

{446}

          Eleventh Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ xv. 1, 10.
_Brethren:_ I make known unto you the gospel which I
preached to you, which also you have received, and wherein you
stand, by which also you are saved: if you hold fast after what
manner I preached unto you, unless you have believed in vain. For
I delivered unto you first of all, which I also received: how
that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures: and
that he was buried, and that he arose again the third day
according to the Scriptures: and that he was seen by Cephas; and
after that by the eleven. Then was he seen by more than five
hundred brethren at once; of whom many remain until this present,
and some are fallen asleep. After that he was seen by James, then
by all the apostles: and last of all, he was seen also by me, as
one born out of due time. For I am the least of the apostles, who
am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God. But by the grace of God I am what i am; and his
grace in me hath not been void.


Gospel.
_Mark_ vii. 31, 37.
_At that time:_ Jesus going out of the coast of Tyre, he
came by Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the
coast of Decapolis. And they bring to him one deaf and dumb: and
they besought him that he would lay his hand upon him. And taking
him from the multitude apart, he put his fingers into his ears,
and spitting, he touched his tongue: and looking up to heaven, he
groaned and said to him: Ephpheta, that is, Be opened. And
immediately his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue
was loosed, and he spoke right. And he charged them that they
should tell no man. But the more he charged them, so much the
more a great deal did they publish it. And so much the more did
they wonder, saying: He hath done all things well; he hath made
both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. Credo.

{447}

          Twelfth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
2 _Corinthians_ iii. 4, 9.
_Brethren:_ We have confidence through Christ towards God:
not that we are sufficient to think any thing of ourselves as of
ourselves: but our sufficiency is from God. Who also hath made us
fit ministers of the New Testament, not in the letter, but in the
spirit. For the letter killeth; but the spirit quickeneth. Now if
the ministration of death, engraven with letters upon stones, was
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which
is made void: how shall not the ministration of the Spirit be
rather in glory? For if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, much more the ministration of justice aboundeth in glory.


Gospel.
_Luke_ x. 23, 37.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Blessed are the
eyes that see the things which you see. For I say to you, that
many prophets and kings have desired to see the things that you
see, and have not seen them; and to hear the things that you
hear, and have not heard them. And behold a certain lawyer stood
up, tempting him, and saying: Master, what must I do to possess
eternal life? But he said to him: What is written in the law? how
readest thou? He answering, said: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbour as
thyself."
{448}
And he said to him: Thou hast answered right: this do and thou
shalt live. But he, willing to justify himself, said to Jesus:
And who is my neighbour? And Jesus answering, said: A certain man
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who
had stripped him, and having wounded him, went away, leaving him
half dead. And it chanced that a certain priest went down the
same way: and seeing him, passed by. In like manner also a
Levite, when he was near the place, and saw him, passed by. But a
certain Samaritan being on his journey, came near him: and seeing
him, was moved with compassion. And going up to him, bound up his
wounds, pouring in oil and wine: and setting him upon his own
beast brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And the next
day he took out two pieces, and gave to the host, and said: Take
care of him; and whatsoever thou shalt spend over and above, I at
my return will repay thee. Which of these three in thy opinion
was neighbour to him that fell among robbers? But he said: He
that showed mercy to him. And Jesus said to him: Go, and do thou
in like manner. Credo.


        Thirteenth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Galatians_ iii. 16, 22.
_Brethren:_ To Abraham were the promises made, and to his
seed. He saith not: And to his seeds, as of many; but as of one:
And to thy seed, which is Christ. Now this I say, that the
testament which was confirmed by God, the law which was made
after four hundred and thirty years, doth not disannul, or make
the promise of no effect. For if the inheritance be of the law,
it is no more of promise. But God gave it to Abraham by promise.
Why then was the law? It was set because of transgressions, until
the seed should come, to whom he made the promise, being ordained
by angels in the hand of a mediator.
{449}
Now a mediator is not of one; but God is one. Was the law then
against the promises of God? God forbid. For if there had been a
law given which could give life, verily justice should have been
by the law. But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that
the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xvii. 11, 19.
_At that time:_ As Jesus was going to Jerusalem, he passed
through the midst of Samaria and Galilee. And as he entered into
a certain town, there met him ten men that were lepers, who stood
afar off, and lifted up their voice, saying: Jesus, Master, have
mercy on us. Whom when he saw, he said: Go, show yourselves to
the priests. And it came to pass, that as they went, they were
made clean. And one of them when he saw that he was made clean,
went back, with a loud voice glorifying God. And he fell on his
face before his feet, giving thanks: and this was a Samaritan.
And Jesus answering, said: Were not ten made clean, and where are
the nine? There is no one found to return and give glory to God,
but this stranger. And he said to him: Arise, go thy way; for thy
faith hath made thee whole. Credo.


         Fourteenth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Galatians_ v. 16, 24,
_Brethren:_ Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfil the
lusts of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the spirit; and
the spirit against the flesh: for these are contrary to one
another, so that you do not the things that you would. But if you
are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law. Now the works
of the flesh are manifest, which are, fornication, uncleanness,
immodesty, luxury, idolatry, witchcrafts, enmities, contentions,
emulations, wraths, quarrels, dissensions, sects, envy, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like.
{450}
Of the which I foretell you, as I have foretold to you, that they
who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God. But the
fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, patience, benignity,
goodness, longanimity, mildness, faith, modesty, continency,
chastity. Against such there is no law. And they that are
Christ's, have crucified their flesh with the vices and
concupiscences.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ vi. 24, 33.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: No man can
serve two masters. For either he will hate the one, and love the
other: or he will sustain the one, and despise the other. You
cannot serve God and mammon. Therefore I say to you, be not
solicitous for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body,
what you shall put on. Is not the life more than the meat, and
the body more than the raiment: Behold the birds of the air, for
they neither sow, nor do they reap, nor gather into barns, and
your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are not you of much more value
than they? And which of you, by taking thought, can add to his
stature one cubit? And for raiment why are you solicitous?
Consider the lilies of the field how they grow: they labour not,
neither do they spin. But I say to you, that not even Solomon in
all his glory was arrayed as one of these. And if the grass of
the field, which is to-day, and to-morrow is cast into the oven,
God doth so clothe: how much more you, O ye of little faith. Be
not solicitous therefore, saying, what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? For after all
these things do the heathens seek. For your Father knoweth that
you have need of all these things. Seek ye therefore first the
kingdom of God, and his justice, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Credo.

{451}

         Fifteenth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Galatians_ v. 25. vi. 1, 10.
_Brethren:_ If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit. Let us not be made desirous of vain glory, provoking
one another, envying one another. (Chap, vi.) Brethren, if a man
be overtaken in any fault, you, who are spiritual, instruct such
a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou
also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens: and so you shall
fulfil the law of Christ. For if any man think himself to be
something, whereas he is nothing, he deceiveth himself. But let
every one prove his own work, and so he shall have glory in
himself only, and not in another. For every one shall bear his
own burden. And let him that is instructed in the word,
communicate to him that instructed him, in all good things. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked. For what things a man shall sow,
those also shall he reap. For he that soweth in his flesh, of the
flesh also shall reap corruption. But; he that soweth in the
Spirit, of the Spirit shall reap life everlasting. And in doing
good, let us not fail. For in due time we shall reap, not
failing. Therefore, whilst we have time, let us work good to all
men, but especially to those who are of the household of the
faith.


Gospel.
_Luke_ vii. 11, 16.
_At that time:_ Jesus went into a city called Naim; and
there went with him his disciples, and a great multitude. And
when he came nigh to the city, behold a dead man was carried out,
the only son of his mother, and she was a widow; and much people
of the city were with her. And when the Lord saw her, he had
compassion on her, and said to her: Weep not. And he came near
and touched the bier. And they that carried it, stood still. And
he said: Young man, I say to thee, Arise. And he that was dead,
sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother.
And there came a fear on them all: and they glorified God,
saying: A great prophet is risen up amongst us, and God hath
visited his people.


{452}

         Sixteenth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Ephesians_ iii. 13, 21.
Brethren: I pray you not to faint at my tribulations for you,
which is your glory. For this cause I bow my knee to the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom all paternity in heaven and
earth is named, that he would grant you, according to the riches
of his glory, to be strengthened by his Spirit with might unto
the inward man. That Christ may dwell by faith in your hearts:
that being rooted and founded in charity, you may be able to
comprehend, with all the saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and height, and depth: to know also the clarity of Christ, which
surpasseth all knowledge, that you may be filled unto all the
fullness of God. Now to him who is able to do all things more
abundantly than we desire or understand, according to the power
that worketh in us: to him be glory in the church, and in Christ
Jesus, unto all generations, world without end. Amen.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xiv. 1, 11.
_At that time:_ When Jesus went into the house of one of the
chief of the Pharisees on the Sabbath-day to eat bread, they
watched him. And behold there was a certain man before him that
had the dropsy. And Jesus answering, spoke to the lawyers and
Pharisees, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath-day? But
they held their peace. But he, taking him, healed him, and sent
him away. And answering them, he said: Which of you shall have an
ass or an ox fall into a pit; and will not immediately draw him
out on the Sabbath-day? And they could not answer him to these
things.
{453}
And he spoke a parable also to them that were invited, marking
how they chose the first seats at the table, saying to them: When
thou art invited to a wedding, sit not down in the first place,
lest perhaps one more honourable than thou be invited by him: and
he that invited thee and him, come and say to thee: Give this man
place; and then thou begin with shame to take the lowest place.
But when thou art invited, go, sit down in the lowest place, that
when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee: Friend, go
up higher. Then shalt thou have glory before them that sit at
table with thee; because every one that exalted himself, shall be
humbled; and he that humbleth himself, shall be exalted. Credo.



        Seventeenth Sunday After Pentecost


Epistle.
_Ephesians_  iv. 1, 6.
_Brethren:_ I who am a prisoner in the Lord, beseech you
that you walk worthy of the vocation in which you are called.
With all humility and mildness, with patience, supporting one
another in charity. Careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace. One body and one spirit; as you are called in
one hope of your calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. One
God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
us all, who is blessed for evermore.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxii. 35, 46.
_At that time:_ The Pharisees came to Jesus; and one of
them, a doctor of the law, asked him, tempting him: Master, which
is the great commandment of the law? Jesus said to him: _Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy
whole soul, and with thy whole mind._ This is the greatest and
the first commandment. And the second is like to this: _Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself_. On these two
commandments dependeth the whole law and the prophets.
{454}
And the Pharisees being gathered together, Jesus asked them,
saying: What think you of Christ? whose son is he? They say to
him: David's. He saith to them: How then doth David in spirit
call him Lord, saying: _The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my
right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool?_ If David
then call him Lord, how is he his son? And no man was able to
answer him a word; neither durst any man from that day forth ask
him any more questions. Credo.



        Eighteenth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ i. 4, 8.
_Brethren:_ I give thanks to my God always for you, for the
grace of God, that is given you in Christ Jesus; that in all
things you are made rich in him, in all utterance, and in all
knowledge, as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you. So
that nothing is wanting to you in any grace, waiting for the
manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who also will confirm you
unto the end without crime, in the day of the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ ix. 1, 8.
_At that time:_ Jesus entering into a boat, he passed over
the water and came into his own city. And behold they brought to
him one sick of the palsy, lying on a bed. And Jesus seeing their
faith, said to the man sick of the palsy: Be of good heart, son,
thy sins are forgiven thee. And behold some of the Scribes said
within themselves: He blasphemeth. And Jesus seeing their
thoughts, said: Why do you think evil in your heart? Whether is
it easier to say: Thy sins are forgiven thee: or to say: Arise
and walk? But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on
earth to forgive sins, (then said he to the man sick of the
palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go into thy house. And he
arose and went into his house. And the multitude seeing it,
feared and glorified God that gave such power to men. Credo.

{455}

       Nineteenth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Ephesians_. iv. 23, 28.
_Brethren:_ Be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and put
on the new man, who, according to God, is created in Justice, and
holiness of truth. Wherefore putting away lying, speak ye the
truth every man with his neighbour: for we are members one of
another. Be angry and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your
anger. Give not place to the devil. He that stole, let him now
steal no more: but rather let him labour, working with his hands
the thing which is good, that he may have something to give to
him that suffereth need.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxii. 1, 14.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to the scribes and Pharisees in
a parable, saying: The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king,
who made a marriage for his son. And he sent his servants, to
call them that were invited to the marriage: and they would not
come. Again he sent other servants, saying: Tell them that were
invited: Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my beeves and
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come ye to the
marriage. But they neglected, and went their ways, one to his
farm, and another to his merchandise. And the rest laid hands on
his servants, and having treated them contumeliously, put them to
death. But when the king had heard of it, he was angry, and
sending his armies, he destroyed those murderers, and burnt their
city. Then he saith to his servants: The marriage indeed is
ready: but they that were invited, were not worthy. Go ye
therefore into the high-ways; and as many as you shall find, call
to the marriage. And his servants going forth into the ways,
gathered together all they found, both bad and good: and the
marriage was filled with guests.
{456}
And the king went in to see the guests, and he saw there a man
who had not on a wedding garment. And he saith to him, Friend,
how camest thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? But
he was silent. Then the king said to the waiters: Bind his hands
and his feet, and cast him into the exterior darkness; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called but
few are chosen. Credo.



         Twentieth Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Ephesians_. v. 15, 21.
_Brethren:_ See, therefore, how you walk circumspectly, not
as unwise, but as wise: redeeming the time, because the days are
evil. Wherefore become not unwise, but understanding what is the
will of God. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is luxury, but
be ye filled with the holy Spirit, speaking to yourselves in
psalms and hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing and making
melody in your hearts to the Lord: giving thanks always for all
things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God and the
Father. Being subject one to another in the fear of Christ.


Gospel,
_John_ iv. 46, 53.
_At that time:_ There was a certain ruler, whose son was
sick at Capharnaum. He having heard that Jesus was come from
Judea into Galilee, went to him, and prayed him to come down and
heal his son, for he was at the point of death. Jesus therefore
said to him: Unless you see signs and wonders, you believe not.
The ruler saith to him: Lord, come down before that my son die.
Jesus saith to him: Go thy way, thy son liveth. The man believed
the word which Jesus said to him, and went his way. And as he was
going down, his servants met him: and they brought word, saying,
that his son lived. He asked therefore of them the hour wherein
he grew better. And they said to him: Yesterday at the seventh
hour the fever left him. The father therefore knew that it was at
the same hour that Jesus said to him: Thy son liveth; and himself
believed, and his whole house. Credo.

{457}

      Twenty-First Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Ephesians_. vi. 10, 17.
_Brethren:_ Be strengthened in the Lord, and in the might of
his power. Put you on the armour of God, that you may be able to
stand against the deceits of the devil. For our wrestling is not
against flesh and blood; but against principalities and powers,
against the rulers of the world of this darkness, against the
spirit of wickedness in the high places. Therefore take unto you
the armour of God, that you may be able to resist in the evil
day, and to stand in all things perfect. Stand therefore, having
your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breast-plate
of justice, and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel
of peace; in all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you
may be able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the most wicked
one. And take unto you the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the Spirit, which is the word of God.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xviii. 28, 35.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable:
The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who would take an
account of his servants. And when he had begun to take the
account, one was brought to him that owed him ten thousand
talents. And as he had not wherewith to pay it, his lord
commanded that he should be sold, and his wife and children, and
all that he had, and payment to be made. But that servant falling
down, besought him, saying: Have patience with me and I will pay
thee all.
{458}
And the lord of that servant being moved with pity, let him go,
and forgave him the debt. But when that servant was gone out, he
found one of his fellow-servants that owed him a hundred pence;
and laying hold of him, he throttled him, saying: Pay what thou
owest. And his fellow-servant falling down, besought him, saying:
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not:
but went and cast him into prison, till he paid the debt. Now his
fellow-servants seeing what was done, were very much grieved, and
they came and told their lord all that was done. Then his lord
called him, and said to him: Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee
all the debt, because thou besoughtest me: shouldst not thou then
have had compassion also on thy fellow-servant, even as I had
compassion on thee? And his lord being angry, delivered him to
the torturers, until he paid all the debt. So also shall my
heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not every one his
brother from your hearts. Credo.



       Twenty-Second Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Philippians_ i. 6, 11.
_Brethren:_ We are confident of this very thing, that he who
hath begun a good work in you, will perfect it unto the day of
Christ Jesus. As it is meet for me to think this for you all: for
that I have you in my heart; and that in my bands, and in the
defence and confirmation of the gospel, you are all partakers of
my joy. For God is my witness, how I long after you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that your charity may
more and more abound in knowledge and in all understanding; that
you may approve the better things, that you may be sincere and
without offence unto the day of Christ. Filled with the fruit of
justice, through Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

{459}

Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxii. 15, 21.
_At that time:_ The Pharisees going, consulted among
themselves how to ensnare Jesus in his speech. And they sent to
him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying: Master, we know
that thou art a true speaker, and teachest the way of God in
truth, neither carest thou for any man: for thou dost not regard
the person of men. Tell us therefore what thou dost think, is it
lawful to give tribute to Cæsar or not? But Jesus knowing their
wickedness, said: Why do you tempt me, ye hypocrites? Show me the
coin of the tribute. And they offered him a penny. And Jesus
saith to them: Whose image and inscription is this? They say to
him: Cæsar's. Then he saith to them: Render therefore to Cæsar
the things that are Cæsar's, and to God the things that are
God's. Credo.



       Twenty-Third Sunday After Pentecost.

  Should there be but 23 Sundays after Pentecost, the Mass of the
  24th is said to-day, and this on the preceding Saturday, (if it
  be neither a double nor semi-double,) in which case it is said
  on some vacant day before it.


Epistle.
_Philippians_ iii. 17, 21; iv. 1, 3.
_Brethren:_ Be followers of me, and observe them who walk so
as you have our model. For many walk, of whom I have told you
often, (and now tell you weeping,) that they are enemies of the
cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is their shame: who mind earthly things.
But our conversation is in heaven: from whence also we look for
the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of
our lowness, made like to the body of his glory, according to the
operation whereby also he is able to subdue all things unto
himself. (Chap, iv.) Therefore my dearly beloved brethren, and
most desired, my joy, and my crown: so stand fast in the Lord, my
dearly beloved. I beg of Evodia, and I beseech Syntyche, to be of
one mind in the Lord. And I entreat thee also, my sincere
companion, help those women that have laboured with me in the
gospel, with Clement and the rest of my fellow labourers, whose
names are in the book of life.

{460}

Gospel.
_Matthew_ ix. 18, 26.
_At that time:_ As Jesus was speaking to the multitude,
behold a certain ruler came up and adored him, saying: Lord, my
daughter is even now dead; but come, lay thy hand upon her, and
she shall live. And Jesus rising up followed him, with his
disciples. And behold a woman who was troubled with an issue of
blood twelve years, came behind him and touched the hem of his
garment. For she said within herself: If I shall touch only his
garment, I shall be healed. But Jesus turning and seeing her,
said: Be of good heart, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole.
And the woman was made whole from that hour. And when Jesus was
come into the house of the ruler, and saw the minstrels and the
multitude making a rout, he said: Give place: for the girl is not
dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. And when the
multitude was put forth, he went in and took her by the hand. And
the maid arose. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that
country. Credo.


  As there cannot be less than 23, nor more than 28 Sundays after
  Pentecost, it is to be observed, that the Mass of the 24th is
  always said on that Sunday which immediately precedes Advent.
  When, therefore, it happens that there are any intervening
  Sundays between the 23rd and the last, the Epistles and Gospels
  are taken from the Sundays which were omitted after Epiphany:
  for instance, if but one Sunday, the Mass is of the 6th after
  Epiphany; if two, of the 5th and 6th; if three, of the 4th,
  5th, and 6th; and if four, of the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th.



  Twenty-Fourth, Or Last Sunday After Pentecost.

Epistle.
_Ccolossians_ i. 9, 14.
_Brethren:_ We cease not to pray for you, and to beg that
you may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom,
and spiritual understanding: that you may walk worthy of God, in
all things pleasing: being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God: strengthened with all might,
according to the power of his glory, in all patience and
long-suffering with joy. Giving thanks to God the Father, who
hath made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the saints in
light: who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath
translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love, in whom we
have redemption through his blood, the remission of sins.

{461}

Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxiv. 15, 35.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: When you shall
see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by Daniel
the prophet, standing in the holy place: he that readeth let him
understand. Then they that are in Judea, let them flee to the
mountains; and he that is on the house-top, let him not come down
to take any thing out of his house; and he that is in the field,
let him not go back to take his coat. And woe to them that are
with child, and give suck in those days. But pray that your
flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath. For there shall
be then great tribulation, such as hath not been from the
beginning of the world until now, neither shall be. And unless
those days had been shortened, no flesh could be saved: but for
the sake of the elect, those days shall be shortened. Then if any
man shall say to you: Lo! here is Christ, or there: do not
believe him: For there shall arise false Christs, and false
prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch as to
deceive (if possible) even the elect. Behold I have told it you,
beforehand; if therefore they shall say to you: Behold he is in
the desert, go ye not out: Behold he is in the closets, believe
it not. For as lightning cometh out of the east, and appeareth
even into the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be. Wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the eagles also be
gathered together.
{462}
And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun
shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the
stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall
be moved: and there shall appear the sign of the Son of man in
heaven: and then shall all tribes of the earth mourn: and they
shall see the Son of man, coming in the clouds of heaven with
much power and majesty. And he shall send his angels with a
trumpet, and a great voice: and they shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from the farthest parts of the heavens
to the utmost bounds of them. And from the fig-tree learn a
parable: when the branch thereof is now tender, and the leaves
come forth, you know that summer is nigh. So you also, when you
shall see all these things, know ye that it is nigh even at the
doors. Amen, I say to you, that this generation shall not pass,
till these things be done. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my
words shall not pass. Credo.

{463}

              The Common Of Saints.


         Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
                 8th December.


Lesson.
_Proverbs_ viii. 22, 35.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before he
made any thing, from the beginning. I was set up from eternity,
and of old, before the earth was made. The depths were not as
yet, and I was already conceived, neither had the fountains of
water as yet sprung out: the mountains with their huge bulk had
not as yet been established: before the hills I was brought
forth: he had not yet made the earth, nor the rivers, nor the
poles of the world. When he prepared the heavens, I was there:
when with a certain law and compass he enclosed he depths: when
he established the sky above, and poised the fountains of waters:
when he compassed the sea with its bounds, and set a law to the
waters, that they should not pass their limits: when he balanced
the foundations of the earth, I was with him forming all things,
and was delighted every day, playing before him at all times,
playing in the world: and my delight is to be with the children
of men. Now, therefore, ye children, hear me: blessed are they
that keep my ways. Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it
not. Blessed is the man that heareth me, and that watcheth daily
at my gates, and waiteth at the posts of my doors. He that shall
find me shall find life, and shall have salvation from the Lord.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ i. 1, 16.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham. Abraham begot Isaac. And Isaac begot Jacob. And
Jacob begot Judas and his brethren. And Judas begot Phares and
Zara of Thamar.
{464}
And Phares begot Esron. And Esron begot Aram. And Aram begot
Aminidab. And Aminidab begot Naasson. And Naasson begot Salmon.
And Salmon begot Booz of Rahab. And Booz begot Obed of Ruth. And
Obed begot Jesse. And Jesse begot David the king. And David the
king begot Solomon, of her who had been _the wife_ of Urias.
And Solomon begot Roboam. And Roboam begot Abia. And Abia begot
Asa. And Asa begot Josaphat. And Josaphat begot Joram. And Joram
begot Ozias. And Ozias begot Joatham. And Joatham begot Achaz.
And Achaz begot Ezechias. And Ezechias begot Menasses. And
Menasses begot Amon. And Amon begot Josias. And Josias begot
Jechonias and his brethren in the transmigration of Babylon. And
after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechonias begot Salathiel.
And Salathiel begot Zorobabel. And Zorobabel begot Abiub. And
Abiub begot Eliacim. And Eliacim begot Azor. And Azor begot
Sadoc. And Sadoc begot Achim. And Achim begot Eliud. And Eliud
begot Eleazar. And Eleazar begot Matham. And Matham begot Jacob.
And Jacob begot Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus, who is called Christ.



  Of St. Patrick, ap. and Patron of Ireland.
                  17th March.

Lesson.
_Ecclesiastes_ xliv. xlv.
Behold a great priest, who in his time pleased God, and was found
just; and in the time of wrath became an atonement. There were
none found like him in observing the law of the Most High.
Therefore by an oath did the Lord make him great amongst his
people. He gave him the blessing of all nations, and established
his covenant on his head. He acknowledged him in his blessings:
he stored up his mercy for him; and he found favour in the eyes
of the Lord. (Chap, xlv.) He exalted him in the sight of kings;
and gave him a crown of glory. He made with him an eternal
covenant: and bestowed on him a great priesthood: and rendered
him blessed in glory. To perform the priestly office, to sing
praises to the name of God; and to offer him precious incense for
an odour of sweetness.

{465}

Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxv. 14, 23.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke this parable to his disciples: A
man going into a far country, called his servants, and delivered
to them his goods. And to one he gave five talents, and to
another two, and to another one, to every one according to his
proper ability; and immediately he took his journey. And he that
had received the five talents went his way, and traded with the
same, and gained other five. And in like manner he that had
received the two, gained other two. But he that had received the
one, going his way, digged into the earth, and hid his lord's
money. But after a long time the lord of those servants came, and
reckoned with them. And he that had received the five talents,
coming, brought other five talents, saying: Lord, thou didst
deliver to me five talents, behold I have gained other five over
and above. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful
servant, because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I
will place thee over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy
lord. And he also that had received the two talents came and
said: Lord, thou deliveredst two talents to me: behold I have
gained other two. His lord said to him: Well done, good and
faithful servant, because thou hast been faithful over a few
things, I will place thee over many things: enter thou into the
joy of thy lord.



      Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
                   25th March.

Lesson.
_Isaiah_ vii. 10. 16.
_In those days:_ The Lord spoke unto Achaz, saying: Ask thee
a sign of the Lord thy God, either unto the depth of hell, or
unto the height above.
{466}
And Achaz said: I will not ask, and I will not tempt the Lord.
And he said: Hear ye, therefore, O house of David; Is it a small
thing for you to be grievous to men, that you are grievous to my
God also? Therefore, the Lord himself shall give you a sign.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his name shall
be called Emmanuel. He shall eat butter and honey, that he may
know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good.


Gospel.
_Luke_ i. 26, 38.
_At that time:_ The angel Gabriel was sent from God into a
city of Galilee, called Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house of David: and the virgin's
name was Mary. And the angel being come in, said unto her: Hail
Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou
among women. Who having heard, was troubled at his saying, and
thought with herself what manner of salutation this should be.
And the angel said to her: Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found
grace with God. Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt
bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus. He shall
be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High, and the
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of David his father: and
he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
there shall be no end. And Mary said to the angel: How shall this
be done, because I know not man? And the angel answering, said to
her: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Most High shall overshadow thee. And therefore also the Holy
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. And
behold thy cousin Elizabeth she also hath conceived a son in her
old age; and this is the sixth month with her that is called
barren: because no word shall be impossible with God. And Mary
said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it done to me according
to thy word.

{467}

            SS. Peter _and_ Paul.

                    29th June.

Lesson.
_Acts_ xii. 1, 11.
_In those days:_ Herod the king stretched forth his hand to
afflict some of the church. And he killed James the brother of
John with the sword. And seeing that it pleased the Jews, he
proceeded to take up Peter also. Now it was in the days of
Azymes. And when he had apprehended him, he cast him into prison,
delivering him to four files of soldiers to be kept, intending
after the pasch to bring him forth to the people. Peter therefore
was kept in prison. But prayer was made without ceasing by the
church unto God for him. And when Herod would have brought him
forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers,
bound with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the
prison. And behold an angel of the Lord stood by him: and a light
shined in the room: and he striking Peter on the side raised him
up, saying: Arise quickly. And the chains fell off from his
hands. And the angel said to him: Gird thyself, and put on thy
sandals. And he did so. And he said to him: Cast thy garment
about thee, and follow me. And going out he followed him, and he
knew not that it was true which was done by the angel: but
thought he saw a vision. And passing through the first and second
ward, they came to the iron gate that leadeth to the city, which
of itself opened to them. And going out, they passed on through
one street: and immediately the angel departed from him. And
Peter coming to himself, said: Now I know in very deed that the
Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand
of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xvi. 13, 19.
_At that time:_ Jesus came into the quarters of Cesarea
Philippi: and he asked his disciples, saying: Whom do men say
that the Son of man is? But they said: Some, John the Baptist,
and other some, Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the
prophets.
{468}
Jesus saith to them: But whom do you say that I am? Simon Peter
answered and said: Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.
And Jesus answering, said to him: Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-Jona; because flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee,
but my Father who is in heaven. And I say to thee: That thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give to thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. And whatsoever thou shalt bind
upon earth, it shall be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever thou
shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in heaven. Credo.



       Assumption _of the_ Blessed Virgin Mary.

                 15th August.

Lesson.
_Ecclesiastes_ xxiv. 11, 20.
I sought rest every where, and I shall abide in the inheritance
of the Lord. Then the Creator of all things gave his orders, and
said to me: and he that made me, rested in my tabernacle, and he
said to me: Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thy inheritance in
Israel, and take root in my elect. From the beginning, and before
the world was I created, and unto the world to come I shall not
cease to be, and in the holy dwelling place I have ministered
before him. And I was so established in Sion, and in the holy
city likewise I rested, and my power _was_ in Jerusalem. And
I took root in an honourable people, and in the portion of my God
his inheritance, and my abode is in the full assembly of saints.
I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress-tree on
mount Sion. I was exalted like a palm-tree in Cades, and as a
rose plant in Jericho: as a fair olive-tree in the plains, and as
a plane-tree by the water in the streets, was I exalted. I gave a
sweet smell like cinnamon, and aromatical balm: like the myrrh I
yielded a sweet odour.

{469}

Gospel.
_Luke_ x. 38, 42.
_At that time:_ Jesus entered into a certain town; and a
certain woman named Martha, received him into her house. And she
had a sister called Mary. Who sitting also at the Lord's feet,
heard his word. But Martha was busy about much serving. Who stood
and said: Lord, hast thou no care that my sister hath left me
alone to serve? Speak to her therefore, that she help me. And the
Lord answering, said to her: Martha, Martha, thou art careful,
and art troubled about many things. But one thing is necessary.
Mary hath chosen the best part, which shall not be taken from
her. Credo.



               Feast Of All Saints.

                  1st November.

Lesson.
_Revelation_ vii. 2, 12.
_In those days:_ Behold
I, John, saw another angel ascending from the rising of the sun,
having the sign of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice
to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and
the sea, saying: Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees,
till we have signed the servants of our God in their foreheads.
And I heard the number of them that were signed, an hundred
forty-four thousand were signed, of every tribe of the children
of Israel. Of the tribe of Judah, were twelve thousand signed: Of
the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe of Gad,
twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe of Aser, twelve thousand
signed: Of the tribe of Nephtali, twelve thousand signed: Of the
tribe of Manasses, twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe of
Simeon, twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe of Levi, twelve
thousand signed: Of the tribe of Issachar, twelve thousand
signed: Of the tribe of Zebulon, twelve thousand signed: Of the
tribe of Joseph, twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe of
Benjamin, twelve thousand signed.
{470}
After this I saw a great multitude, which no man could number, of
all nations and tribes, and peoples and tongues; standing before
the throne and in sight of the Lamb, clothed with white robes,
and palms in their hands; and they cried with a loud voice,
saying: Salvation to our God who sitteth upon the throne, and to
the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and
the ancients, and the four living creatures; and they fell down
before the throne upon their faces, and adored God, saying: Amen.
Benediction, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, honour, and
power, and strength to our God for ever and ever. Amen.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ v. 1, 12.
_At that time:_ Jesus seeing the multitude, went up into a
mountain, and when he was set down, his disciples came unto him.
And opening his mouth he taught them, saying: Blessed are the
poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are
the meek; for they shall possess the land. Blessed are they that
mourn; for they shall be comforted. Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after justice; for they shall have their fill. Blessed
are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the
clean of heart; for they shall see God. Blessed are the peace
makers; for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are
they that suffer persecution for justice sake; for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and
persecute you, and speak all that is evil against you untruly,
for my sake; be glad and rejoice, for your reward is very great
in heaven. Credo.



   Commemoration _of the_ Faithful _departed_.

                  2nd November.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ xv. 51, 57.
_Brethren:_ Behold I tell you a mystery: We shall all indeed
rise again; but we shall not all be changed.
{471}
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet: for
the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall rise again
incorruptible; and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must
put on incorruption; and this mortal must put on immortality. And
when this mortal hath put on immortality, then shall come to pass
the saying that is written: _Death is swallowed up in victory,
O grave, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting?_
Now the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law. But thanks be to God, who hath given us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ.


Gospel.
_John_ v. 25, 29.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to the multitude of the Jews:
Amen, amen, I say unto you, that the hour cometh, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they
that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so
he hath given to the Son also to have life in himself: and he
hath given him power to do judgment, because he is the Son of
man. Wonder not at this, for the hour cometh wherein all that are
in the grave shall hear the voice of the Son of God. And they
that have done good things shall come forth unto the resurrection
of life: but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
judgment.

{472}

                 Common Of Saints.


          For The Vigil Of An Apostle,

       Which May Be Read On The Festival Day.

Lesson.
_Ecclesiastes_ xliv. _and_ xlv.
The blessing of the Lord is on the head of the righteous man.
Therefore did the Lord give him an inheritance, and assign him a
part among the twelve tribes; and he found grace in the sight of
all flesh. And he made him great to the terror of his enemies,
and by his words he tamed monsters. He rendered him glorious in
the presence of kings, and gave him his commandments in the sight
of his people, and showed him his glory. For his faith and
meekness he sanctified him, and made choice of him among all
flesh: and publicly gave him his precepts, and the law of life
and discipline, and highly exalted him. He settled with him an
eternal covenant, and encompassed him with the girdle of
righteousness: and the Lord hath put on him a crown of glory.


Gospel.
_John_ xv. 12, 16.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: This is my
commandment, that you love one another, as I have loved you.
Greater love than this no man hath, that a man lay down his life
for his friends. You are my friends, if you do the things that I
command you. I will not now call you servants; for the servant
knoweth not what his lord doth. But I have called you friends:
because all things whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have
made known to you. You have not chosen me: but I have chosen you;
and have appointed you that you should go, and should bring forth
fruit: and your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you shall
ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.




              Of a Martyr and Bishop.

Epistle.
_James_ i. 12, 18.
_Dearly beloved:_ Blessed is the man that endureth
temptation; for when he hath been proved, he shall receive the
crown of life which God hath promised to them that love him.
{473}
Let no man, when he is tempted, say that he is tempted by God.
For God is not a tempter of evils, and he tempteth no man. But
every man is tempted by his own concupiscence, being drawn away
and allured. Then when concupiscence hath conceived, it bringeth
forth sin. But sin, when it is completed, begetteth death. Do not
err therefore, my dearest brethren. Every best gift, and every
perfect gift, is from above, coming down from the Father of
lights, with whom there is no change, nor shadow of alteration.
For of his own will hath he begotten us by the word of truth,
that we might be some beginning of his creatures.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xiv. 26, 33.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: If any man come
to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also,
he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not carry his cross
and come after me, cannot be my disciple. For which of you having
a mind to build a tower, doth not first sit down and reckon the
charges that are necessary, whether he have wherewithal to finish
it: lest, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to
finish it, all that see it begin to mock him, saying: This man
began to build, and was not able to finish. Or, what king about
to go and make war against another king, doth not first sit down
and think whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that
with twenty thousand cometh out against him. Or else, whilst the
other is yet afar off, sending an embassy, he desireth conditions
of peace. So likewise every one of you that doth not renounce all
that he possesseth, cannot be my disciple.



             Of a Martyr not a Bishop.

Lesson.
_Wisdom_ x. 10, 14.
The Lord conducted the just man through the right ways, and
showed him the kingdom of God, and gave him the knowledge of the
holy things: made him honourable in his labours, and accomplished
his labours.
{474}
In the deceit of them that over-reached him, she stood by him,
and made him honourable. She kept him safe from his enemies, and
she defended him from seducers, and gave him a strong conflict,
that he might overcome, and know that wisdom is mightier than
all. She forsook not the just when he was sold, but delivered him
from sinners: she went down with him into the pit, and in bands
she left him not, till she brought him the sceptre of the
kingdom, and power against those that oppressed him: and showed
them to be liars that accused him, and gave him everlasting
glory.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ x. 34, 42.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Do not think
that I came to send peace upon earth: I came not to send peace,
but the sword. For I came to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And a man's enemies
against they of his own household. He that loveth his father and
mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son
or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And he that taketh
not up his cross, and followeth me, is not worthy of me. He that
findeth his life shall lose it: and he that shall lose his life
for me, shall find it. He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and
he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. He that
receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive the
reward of a prophet: and he that receiveth a just man in the name
of a just man, shall receive the reward of a just man. And
whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup
of cold water only in the name of a disciple, amen, I say to you,
he shall not lose his reward.


                 Of Many Martyrs.

Epistle.
1 _Peter_ i. 3, 7.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who,
according to his great mercy hath regenerated us into a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that cannot fade,
reserved in heaven for you, who by the power of God are kept by
faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
Wherein you shall greatly rejoice, if now you must be for a
little time made sorrowful in divers temptations; that the trial
of your faith (much more precious than gold which is tried by the
fire) may be found unto praise, and glory, and honour, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ our Lord.

{475}

Gospel.
_John_ xv. 5, 11.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: I am the vine,
you the branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same
beareth much fruit: for without me you can do nothing. If any one
abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as a branch, and shall
wither, and they shall gather him up, and cast him into the fire,
and he burneth. If you abide in me, and my word abide in you, you
shall ask whatever you will, and it shall be done unto you. In
this is my Father glorified; that you bring forth very much
fruit, and become my disciples. As the Father hath loved me, I
also have loved you. Abide in my love. If you keep my
commandments, you shall abide in my love; as I also have kept my
Father's commandments, and do abide in his love. These things
have I spoken to you, that my joy may be in you, and your joy may
be filled.


             Of A Confessor And Bishop.
    Lesson _and_ Gospel, _as in page_ 79.


            Of A Confessor Not A Bishop.

Lesson.
_Ecclesiastes_ xxxi. 8. 11.
Blessed is the man that is found without blemish; and that hath
not gone after gold, nor put his trust in money nor in treasures.
Who is he, and we will praise him, for he hath done wonderful
things in his life. Who hath been tried thereby, and made
perfect, he shall have glory everlasting, He that could have
transgressed, and hath not transgressed: and could do evil
things, and hath not done them. Therefore are his goods
established in the Lord, and all the church of the saints shall
declare his alms.

{476}

Gospel.
_Luke_ xii. 35, 40.
_At that time:_ Jesus said to his disciples: Let your loins
be girt, and lamps burning in your hands, and you yourselves like
to men who wait for their lord, when he shall return from their
wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open to him
immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord, when he
cometh, shall find watching: Amen, I say to you, that he will
gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and passing will
minister unto them. And if he shall come in the second watch, or
come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those
servants. But this know ye, that if the householder did know at
what hour the thief would come, he would surely watch, and would
not suffer his house to be broke open. Be you then also ready:
for at what hour you think not, the Son of man will come.


             Of a Virgin And Martyr.

Lesson.
_Ecclesiastes_ li. 1, 8.
I will give glory to thee, O Lord, my King, and I will praise
thee, O God, my Saviour. I will give glory to thy name, for thou
hast been a helper and protector to me, and hast preserved my
body from destruction, from the snare of an unjust tongue, and
from the lips of them that forge lies, and in the sight of them
that stood by, thou hast been my helper. And thou hast delivered:
me according to the multitude of the mercy of thy name, from the
roaring _lions_, that were ready to devour me. Out of the
hands of them that sought my life, and from the gates of
afflictions, which compassed me about: from the oppression of the
flame which surrounded me, and in the midst of the fire I was not
burnt. From the depth of the belly of hell, and from an unclean
tongue, and from lying words, from an unjust king, and from a
slanderous tongue: my soul shall praise the Lord even to death,
because thou succourest those that trust in thee, and deliverest
them from the hands of the Gentiles, O Lord our God.

{477}

Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxv. 1, 13.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable:
The kingdom of heaven shall be like to ten virgins, who taking
their lamps went out to meet the bridegroom and the bride. And
five of them were foolish, and five wise. But the five foolish,
having taken their lamps, did not take oil with them: but the
wise took oil in their vessels with the lamps. And the bridegroom
tarrying, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was
a cry made: Behold the bridegroom cometh, go ye forth to meet
him. Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps. And
the foolish said to the wise: Give us of your oil, for our lamps
are gone out. The wise answered, saying: Lest perhaps there be
not enough for us and for you, go you rather to them that sell,
and buy for yourselves. Now whilst they went to buy, the
bridegroom came: and they that were ready, went in with him to
the marriage, and the door was shut. But at last came also the
other virgins, saying: Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered,
saying: Amen, I say to you, I know you not. Watch ye therefore,
because you know not the day nor the hour.



           Of Many Virgins And Martyrs.

Epistle.
1 _Corinthians_ vii. 25, 34.
_Brethren:_ Concerning virgins I have no commandment of the
Lord: but I give counsel, as having obtained mercy of the Lord to
be faithful. I think therefore, that this is good for the present
necessity, for a man so to be. Art thou bound to a wife? seek not
to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife. But
if thou take a wife, thou hast not sinned. And if a virgin marry,
she hath not sinned: nevertheless, such shall have tribulation of
the flesh.
{478}
But I spare you. This therefore I say, brethren: the time is
short: it remaineth, that they also who have wives, be as if they
had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they
that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as
though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as if
they used it not: for the fashion of this world passeth away. But
I would have you to be without solicitude. He that is without a
wife, is solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord, how
he may please God. But he that is with a wife, is solicitous for
the things of the world, how he may please his wife; and he is
divided. And the unmarried woman and the virgin thinketh on the
things of the Lord: that she may be holy both in body and spirit,
in Christ Jesus our Lord.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxv. 1, 13,
_as in page_ 92.



                 Of a Virgin only.

Epistle.
2 _Corinthians_ x. 17; xi. 1, 2.
_Brethren: _Let him that glorieth, glory in the Lord: for
not he that commendeth himself is approved; but he whom God
commendeth. [_Chap_. xi.] Would to God you could bear with
some little of my folly: but do bear with me. For I am jealous of
you with the jealousy of God. For I have espoused you to one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xxv. 1, 13,
_as in page_ 92.



                  Of Holy Women.

Lesson.
_Proverbs_ xxxi. 10.
Who shall find a valiant woman? the price of her is _as of
things brought_ from afar off, and from the uttermost coasts.
The heart of her husband trusteth in her, and he shall have no
need of spoils. She will render him good and not evil, all the
days of her life. She hath sought wool and flax, and hath wrought
by the counsel of her hands. She is like the merchant's ship, she
bringeth her bread from afar. And she hath risen in the night,
and given prey to her household, and victuals to her maidens. She
hath considered a field, and bought it: with the fruit of her
hands she hath planted a vineyard.
{479}
She hath girded her loins with strength, and hath strengthened
her arm. She hath tasted and seen that her traffic is good: her
lamp shall not be put out in the night. She hath put out her hand
to strong things, and her fingers have taken hold of the spindle.
She hath opened her hand to the needy, and stretched out her
hands to the poor. She shall not fear for her house in the cold
of snow, for all her domestics are clothed with double garments.
She hath made for herself clothing of tapestry; fine linen and
purple is her covering. Her husband is honourable in the gates,
where he sitteth among the senators of the land. She made fine
linen and sold it, and delivered a girdle to the Chananite.
Strength and beauty are her clothing, and she shall laugh in the
latter day. She hath opened her mouth to wisdom, and the law of
clemency is on her tongue. She hath looked well to the paths of
her house, and hath not eaten her bread idle. Her children rose
up, and called her blessed: her husband, and he praised her. Many
daughters have gathered together riches: thou hast surpassed them
all. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: the woman that
feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of
her hands, and let her works praise her in the gates.


Gospel.
_Matthew_ xiii. 44, 52.
_At that time:_ Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable:
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in a field.
Which a man having found, hid it, and for joy thereof goeth, and
selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. Again the
kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant seeking good pearls. Who
when he had found one pearl of great price, went his way, and
sold all that he had, and bought it. Again the kingdom of heaven
is like to a net cast into the sea, and gathering together of all
kinds of fishes. Which, when it was filled they drew out, and
sitting by the shore, they chose out the good into vessels, but
the bad they cast forth. So shall it be at the end of the world.
The angels shall go out, and shall separate the wicked from among
the just.
{480}
And shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Have you understood all these
things? They say to him: Yes. He said unto them: Therefore every
scribe instructed in the kingdom of heaven, is like to a man who
is a householder, who bringeth forth out of his treasure new
things and old.



   Anniversary Mass Of The Dedication Of A Church.

Lesson.
_Revelation_ xxi. 2, 5.
_In those days:_ I John saw the holy city, the new
Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven, from God, prepared as a
bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice from the
throne, saying: Behold the tabernacle of God with men, and he
will dwell with them. And they shall be his people: and God
himself with them shall be their God. And God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes: and death shall be no more, nor mourning,
nor crying, nor sorrow shall be any more, for the former things
are passed away. And he that sat on the throne said: Behold I
make all things new.


Gospel.
_Luke_ xix. 1, 10.
_At that time: _Jesus entering in, he walked through
Jericho. And behold there was a man named Zacheus, who was the
chief of the publicans, and he was rich. And he sought to see
Jesus, who he was, and he could not, for the crowd, because he
was low of stature. And running before he climbed up into a
sycamore tree that he might see him: for he was to pass that way.
And when Jesus was come to the place, looking up he saw him, and
said to him: Zacheus, make haste and come down: for this day I
must abide in thy house. And he made haste and came down, and
received him with joy. And when all saw it, they murmured,
saying: that he was gone to be a guest with a man that was a
sinner. But Zacheus standing said to the Lord: Behold, Lord, the
half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have wronged any
man of any thing, I restore him four-fold. Jesus said to him:
This day is salvation come to this house; because he also is a
son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save
that which was lost. Credo.

{481}

                   For The Dead
       _On the day of Decease or Burial._

Epistle.
1 Thessalonians iv. 12, 17.
_Brethren:_ We will not have you ignorant concerning them
that are asleep, that you be not sorrowful, even as others who
have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them who have slept through Jesus, will God bring with
him. For this we say unto you in the word of the Lord, that we
who are alive, who remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent them who have slept. For the Lord himself shall come down
from heaven with commandment: and with the voice of an archangel,
and with the trumpet of God: and the dead who are in Christ,
shall rise first. Then we who are alive, who are left, shall be
taken up together with them in the clouds to meet Christ, into
the air, and so shall we be always with the Lord. Wherefore
comfort ye one another with these words.


Gospel.
_John_ xi. 21, 27.
_At that time:_ Martha said to Jesus: Lord, if thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died. But now also I know that
whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee. Jesus
saith to her: Thy brother shall rise again. Martha saith to him:
I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last
day. Jesus said to her: I am the resurrection and the life; he
that believeth in me, although he be dead, shall live. And every
one that liveth, and believeth in me, shall not die for ever.
Believest thou this? She saith to him: Yea, Lord, I have believed
that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, who art come into
this world.

{482}

            Instructions And Devotions

               For  Confirmation.


  Confirmation is a sacrament instituted by our Lord Jesus
  Christ, to enable us to arrive at the state of perfect
  Christians, and to strengthen the spiritual life of grace which
  we received at baptism. It is called _Confirmation_, from
  its effect, which is to _confirm_ and _fortify_ those
  who receive it with the necessary dispositions, in the
  possession of the true faith, to arm them against their
  spiritual enemies, and to complete and finish in them the
  sanctification which baptism had begun. In baptism we receive
  the character of the children of God; in confirmation we
  receive the strength of men, and the character of the soldiers
  of Jesus Christ, says St. Melchiades. In baptism we are
  enlisted under the standard of Christ crucified; in
  confirmation we are armed with the shield of faith, and enabled
  to combat against the devil, the world, and the flesh. In baptism
  we are regenerated, and receive the sanctifying grace of God for
  the remission of sins; in confirmation we are prepared for a
  spiritual warfare, and receive the Holy Ghost for a force and
  corroboration, that we may stand firm in the divine service,
  for the sake of Christ, with a holy vigour of spirit and
  constancy of mind, amidst the terrors of the severest trials
  and persecutions.

  The effects of this sacrament appear visibly, not only in
  thousands of holy martyrs, but also in the apostles, who, after
  they had been confirmed on Whitsunday, by the Holy Ghost coming
  down upon them, were immediately changed into new men, and were
  animated by this Divine Spirit to that degree, that sufferings
  for the sweet name of Jesus became the subject of their glory.
  It is evident from Acts, viii. and xix., that the apostles
  practised confirmation, as a means to communicate the graces
  and gifts of the Holy Ghost to the faithful.
{483}
  It is of confirmation also that St. Paul makes mention, Hebrews
  vi. 1, 2, and 2 Corinthians i. 21, 22, where he expressly says:
  _Now he who confirmeth us with you in Christ, and hath
  anointed us, is God; who hath also sealed us, and given us the
  earnest of the Spirit in our hearts._

  The testaments of the most ancient writers plainly show, that
  the church of God, from the apostles' days, has always believed
  confirmation to be a sacrament of the new law, and administered
  it as such. Among the rest, St. Clement, a contemporary of the
  apostles, says, chap. 4, that he received this doctrine from
  St. Peter and other apostles; and therefore he exhorts all,
  without delay, to hasten to be signed by the bishop, that they
  may receive the seven-fold grace of the Holy Ghost, since he
  cannot be a perfect Christian who wilfully neglects this
  sacrament. Tertullian, St. Fabian, and St. Melchiades, who
  flourished in the second, third, and fourth centuries; St.
  Cyprian, St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, &c. have handed down the same
  doctrine: and St. Augustine, cont. lit. Petil. 2, c. 104, says
  in express terms, "The sacrament of chrism in the kind of
  visible seals, is sacred and holy, even as baptism itself."
  Moreover, it is plain from the 8th chapter of the Acts of the
  Apostles, ver. 14, that the _visible sign_ of the
  imposition of hands has annexed to it an _invisible
  grace_, viz. the imparting of the Holy Ghost. Consequently,
  confirmation is a sacrament, as it has all things necessary to
  constitute a sacrament, and is a _visible sign of an
  invisible grace, &c._

  The ordinary minister of this sacrament is a bishop only; and
  it was for this reason that St. Peter and St. John, who were
  both bishops, were sent to confirm the Samaritans, who had been
  converted and baptised by Philip, the deacon; which is an
  additional proof, that confirmation is a holy sacrament, and
  not a mere ceremony, as Calvin pretends; for were it only a
  ceremony that they had administered, why did not Philip, the
  deacon, who baptised the Samaritans, use that ceremony? Where
  was the necessity of sending two bishops to Samaria, as the
  apostles did?--_Acts_ viii.

  As water is made use of in baptism, so chrism is used in
  confirmation. _Chrism_ is a sacred ointment, composed of
  _oil of olives_ and _balsam_ (or _balm_) _of
  Gilead_, solemnly blessed by a bishop on Holy Thursday.
{484}
  The unction, or outward anointing with _chrism_,
  represents the inward anointing of the soul with the gifts of
  the Holy Ghost; as the outward ablution with water in baptism,
  denotes the inward washing of the soul by the sanctifying grace
  of God. The oil, whose properties are to assuage our pains, to
  fortify the limbs, and to give a certain vigour to the body,
  represents the spiritual effects of the grace of this sacrament
  in the soul; and the balm, which is of a sweet smell, and whose
  property is to preserve bodies from putrefaction, represents
  the good odour or sweet savour of Christian virtues with which
  we are to edify our neighbours after having received this
  sacrament. The form of words used in conferring this sacrament
  is this: _I sign thee with the sign of the cross, I confirm
  thee with the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father,
  and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost._ Whilst the bishop
  pronounces the form, he makes the sign of the cross with the
  holy chrism, upon the forehead of each person that is to be
  confirmed, to give them to understand, that no worldly fear or
  shame is to deter them from confessing Christ crucified; but
  that they are openly to profess the doctrines and maxims of his
  gospel, and live as becomes members of his church in spite of
  the ill example and corrupt maxims of the world. Hence
  Tertullian says, lib. 1. adv. Marc. "The flesh is anointed,
  that the soul may be consecrated. The flesh is signed, that the
  soul may be fenced. The flesh, by the imposition of hands, is
  shadowed, that the soul, by the spirit, may be
  illuminated."--This is what the bishop prays for, when turning
  himself towards those that are to be confirmed, with his hands
  joined before his breast, he says, _May the Holy Ghost come
  down upon you and the power of the Most High keep you from all
  sins.--Amen_. A little blow is given on the cheek to the
  persons confirmed, to imprint in their minds, that they are to
  be ready to bear with meekness and patience, all crosses,
  persecutions, trials, affronts, and injuries, for the sake and
  glory of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ. At the same time
  the bishop says, _Peace be with thee_, to signify that the
  true peace of God, which, as St. Paul says, _exceeds all
  understanding_, is chiefly to be found in patient suffering
  for God and his truths. Lastly, the bishop prays for those who
  have been confirmed, that the Holy Ghost may ever dwell in
  their hearts, and make them temples of his glory. After which
  be dismisses them with his blessing, &c.

{485}

  Q. Can this sacrament of confirmation be received more than
  once?

  A. No; because, like baptism, it imprints an indelible
  character or spiritual mark in the soul, which always remains.

  Q. Is there any spiritual kindred contracted in confirmation?

  A. Yes; the godfather or the godmother contracts the same
  spiritual kindred as in the sacrament of baptism.

  Q. Is confirmation absolutely necessary to salvation?

  A. It is not so necessary but that a person may be saved
  without it; yet, when a favourable opportunity offers for
  receiving it, it would be certainly a sin to neglect so
  powerful a help to salvation, and deprive ourselves of the
  benefit of this holy sacrament, which our blessed Redeemer was
  mercifully pleased of his infinite goodness to institute, as
  the never-failing means in his church to communicate his divine
  spirit to his followers. It would be a still more grievous
  crime to neglect confirmation through contempt, disregard, or
  want of faith. It is to a wilful neglect of this sacrament that
  the holy fathers attribute the downfall of several apostates
  from the true religion.

  Q. What kind of persons stand most in need of the grace of this
  sacrament?

  A. Those who are most exposed to temptations against faith, or
  to persecutions upon account of their religion.

  Q. At what age may a person be confirmed?

  A. Ordinarily speaking, the church does not give confirmation
  to children before they are seven years old; but defers it till
  they come to the use of reason, and are sufficiently instructed
  and prepared. Fathers and mothers should take care to have them
  carefully instructed in the Christian doctrine, and regularly
  prepared to be presented to the bishop for confirmation at the
  proper time, before they have received the Blessed Eucharist.
  If their children be lost through ignorance, they shall answer
  for it to God.

  Q. What are the dispositions necessary for receiving the
  sacrament of confirmation worthily?

  A. A person must be free from the guilt of mortal sin, and in
  the state of grace; for the _holy spirit of wisdom will not
  enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to
  sins_.--Wisdom i. 4. He must also be well instructed in the
  principles of the Christian faith, according to his age and
  capacity, and have a proper sense of what he is doing.

{486}

  Q. In what manner then must a person prepare himself for
  confirmation?

  A. First, he must examine his conscience diligently, and if he
  find it charged with wilful sin, he must take care to purge it
  by a good sacramental confession; for it would be a grievous
  sacrilege to presume to receive the sacrament of confirmation,
  knowingly in the state of mortal sin.--Secondly, he must
  prepare himself some days before by devout and humble prayer,
  frequently and fervently calling upon God to dispose his soul
  for receiving the Holy Ghost, who communicates his gracious
  gifts and favours in proportion to the dispositions with which
  they are received.

  Q. As confirmation is ordained for the sanctification of souls,
  why do not all who receive it become saints?

  A. The fault is entirely their own. God on his part is ready to
  bestow all the graces necessary to enable them to become saints;
  but, alas! how few are disposed to improve and co-operate with
  them as they might and ought! How few make the proper use of
  them! How many on the contrary resist them, like the
  stiff-necked Jews! How many _contristate_ and
  _extinguish_ the divine spirit, as the apostle expresses
  it! How many banish this heavenly guest from the temple of
  their souls by falling into mortal sin, and thus obstruct the
  operation of this holy sacrament!

  Q. Is a person obliged to receive the sacrament of confirmation
  fasting?

  A. No. There is no strict obligation or precept for it, though
  to fast on the eve and day of confirmation is a laudable
  custom, and conformable to the practice of the primitive
  church.

  Q. Why are the fervent exercises of piety and devotion required
  before confirmation?

  A. For two reasons: First, because our Saviour has assured us
  that his _heavenly Father will give his good spirit to them
  that ask it._--Luke, xi. 13. Secondly, in imitation of the
  apostles, who, during the ten days between the ascension of our
  Lord and the descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, retired from
  the noise and tumults of the world, and continued with one accord
  in prayer, with Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his
  brethren.--_Acts_, i. 14.

{487}

  Q. Why are we to invoke the Holy Ghost in particular?

  A. Not that we are to neglect praying to the Father and the Son
  also, as we know that all the three persons are but one and the
  same God; but because the work of our sanctification, the
  pouring down the grace of God into our souls, and all the
  heavenly favours and helps that are necessary for conducting us
  in the way of salvation, are the effects of the divine love,
  and are by a peculiar approbation attributed in a special
  manner to the operation of the Holy Ghost, as it is the love of
  the Father and of the Son, and as it is from God's love that
  all grace, all virtue and sanctification, flow and proceed.


           A Prayer Before Confirmation.

O God of infinite goodness and bounty, who has been pleased, at
my baptism, to make me a Christian, to sanctify my soul with thy
grace, and to honour me with the glorious title of thy child;
which, alas! for my part, I have so wretchedly corresponded with,
and have even forfeited a thousand times by my sins: behold,
notwithstanding all my ingratitude, and my repeated treasons,
which thou hast so long and so patiently endured, thou art still
pleased, not only to invite me to return to thee, and to offer me
thy mercy, but also to call upon me at this time, to come and
present myself, in order to receive the greatest of all thy
gifts, even thine own most Holy Spirit; to be consecrated to thee
by his unction; to be made a strong and perfect Christian, and a
soldier of thy Son. O may all heaven and earth praise thee, bless
thee, and glorify thee for ever, for all thy mercies, goodness,
and bounty to me.
{488}
And now, dearest Lord, I desire to come, because such is thy will
and my duty, to receive this great sacrament of Confirmation;
that I may like thy apostles, be _baptised with the Holy Ghost,
and be endowed with power from on high;_ and like them be
changed by divine grace, into another man, in such manner as
henceforward to live up to the dignity, and to fulfil every part
of the duty of a _soldier of Christ!_ and to preserve and
maintain even to death, that purity and sanctity which become the
temple of the living God. But, O my God, how far am I from being
worthy to approach this heavenly sacrament! How can I expect that
thy Holy Spirit should come into my inward house, to make it his
temple, which has been so long possessed by unclean spirits?
Where are the dispositions in me, which the apostles brought, and
which all Christians ought to bring along with them, to the
receiving of the Holy Ghost? O! I acknowledge myself infinitely
unworthy; I confess and detest from the bottom of my heart, all
my past uncleanness and abominations; I humbly crave thy mercy
and pardon, through Jesus Christ thy Son; and beg, through him,
that thou wilt be pleased to cleanse my soul from all its filth
with his precious blood, and to give me thy grace to come to this
sacrament with that humility, faith, and devotion, which is most
agreeable to thee.
{489}
O Divine Spirit, do thou prepare my soul for thyself! Behold, I
come, desiring to give up myself to thee for all time and
eternity, that thou mayest ever live and reign in my soul; and O
let my whole soul henceforward he perpetually subject to thee,
and let nothing in me ever more rebel against thee. Amen.


  Those who are preparing themselves for the sacrament of
  Confirmation, may likewise breathe forth, from time to time,
  the following short Ejaculations:

Come, Holy Ghost, who replenisheth the hearts of the faithful,
descend into my soul, and make it the place of thy abode.

Come, O Divine Spirit, take full possession of my heart, and
kindle in it the fire of thy divine love.

Enter into my soul and abide there for ever, to be my light, my
guide, and my strength.

Come, Holy Ghost, with all thy gifts, and fill my soul;
enlighten, direct, and conduct me in all my ways. Strengthen me
against all the assaults of self-love, remove from me all vicious
shame, and inspire me with a Christian courage.

O grant that I may make the gospel the rule of my life. Preserve
me from the corruption of sin, and from the pernicious maxims of
the world. Give me grace, O God, to do thy will in all things.
Enlighten my eyes, O Lord, that I may never sleep in death.

O uncreated fire, when wilt thou consume whatever is imperfect in
my soul.

Inebriate my soul with thy holy love, O thou sovereign beauty.

{490}

O may I never forget the obligations that are contracted, by
being enlisted a disciple of the cross, in the sacrament of
confirmation.

O grant that I may ever have before my eyes the duties thereunto
annexed, and that I may live henceforward according to the spirit
of a true and perfect Christian.

  "Short ejaculations of this kind, frequently darted from an
  humble and fervent heart, penetrate the clouds, pierce the
  paternal heart of the Father of Mercies, and draw down an ample
  benediction on those pious souls to whom they become familiar
  by practice and habit; this manner of prayer is highly
  commended by the saints, and was one of the principal
  excercises by which the ancient solitaries arrived at the
  highest perfection. It has this peculiar advantage, that one
  can practise it at all times, on all occasions, and in the
  midst of external employment, without being exposed to the
  danger of vain glory, as it is secretly performed in the closet
  of the heart. It is short and easy, does not distract or
  fatigue the mind, but keeps up the fervour of the spirit, and
  attention to the divine presence."


             A Prayer After Confirmation.

O my God, I now desire to adore thee, bless thee, and glorify
thee, for ever, for all thou hast done for me, and for thy whole
church, both of heaven and earth. I would now gladly join both my
heart and my voice with all thy angels and saints in heaven, and
with all that fear thee and love thee on earth, in giving
perpetual praise to thee for thy infinite goodness, and in
particular for that love thou hast shown to me this day. I give
thee thanks from the bottom of my heart, for having sent down the
Holy Spirit into my soul, with all his gifts and graces.
{491}
O let him now take full possession of my soul; let this heavenly
unction penetrate into the very centre of my interior; let his
divine _wisdom_ ever preside there, may it ever enlighten me
with his gifts of _understanding_, and dispel all my
darkness: may it direct me with his _counsel_, strengthen me
with his _fortitude_, instruct me with his _knowledge_,
make me ever fervent in all good, with his _piety_ and
_godliness_ and let his _divine fear_ ever restrain me
from _evil_. And now, dear Lord, since thou hast been
pleased, by this sacrament, to consecrate and sanctify my soul
for thyself, and to make it thy temple, be pleased also to drive
far from it, by thy grace, all that may violate or profane it, or
render it any ways disagreeable to thy eyes. O keep it for ever
for thyself, and restrain Satan from ever entering into it any
more. O let it be a _house of prayer_, in which thou mayest
be ever _worshipped, in spirit and in truth_, and suffer it
not to be made any more a _den of thieves_. Give me grace
also to fulfil, with perfection, every branch of the duty of thy
_soldier_,--which glorious title thou hast _conferred_
on me this day: arm me completely for the warfare in which I am
happily engaged, and stand by me in all my conflicts, to crown me
with victory. O make me _faithful unto death_, and bring me
safe through all the dangers of my mortal pilgrimage, to the
crown of everlasting life: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

  _N. B.--Here repeat the Hymns_, "Creating Spirit, come
  posses;" _and,_ "Come, Holy Ghost, send down those beams,"
  _which are inserted, with the Latin, at the end, under the head
  of Whit-Sunday_.

{492}

              The Psalter Of Jesus.


  "There is no other name under heaven given to men
  whereby we must be saved."--_Acts_. iv. 12.



  This Psalter is divided into three Parts; each part consisting
  of five Petitions, and each Petition prefaced by a tenfold
  repetition of the sacred name of _Jesus_. As it is not to
  be run over in too hasty a manner, but performed with the
  utmost reverence and recollection, the whole may be said
  without interruption; or, each Part at three distinct periods
  of time; according to the leisure which persons may find, after
  discharging the indispensable duties of their several states
  and conditions of life.



                     First Part.

  "At the name of _Jesus_ let every knee bend, both in
  heaven, on earth, and under the earth; and let every tongue
  acknowledge that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God
  the Father."--Philippians ii.


                 The First Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) thou God of compassion, have
mercy on me, and forgive the many and great offences I have
committed in thy sight. Many have been the follies of my life,
and great are the miseries I have deserved for my ingratitude.
Have mercy on me, dear Jesus, for I am weak; heal me, O Lord, for
I am unable to help myself. Deliver me from an inordinate
affection for any of thy creatures, which may divert my eyes from
incessantly looking up to thee. For the love of thee, grant me
henceforth the grace to hate sin, and out of a just esteem of
thee, to despise all worldly vanities.

{493}

Have mercy on all sinners, I beseech thee, dear Jesus; turn their
vices into virtues; and making them sincere lovers of thee, and
observers of thy law, conduct them to bliss in everlasting glory.
For the sake of thy glorious name Jesus, and through the merits
of thy bitter passion, have mercy also on the souls in purgatory.
O blessed Trinity, one eternal God, have mercy on me. Our Father.
Hail, Mary.


               The Second Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) help me to overcome all
temptations to sin, and the malice of my ghostly enemy. Help me
to spend my time in virtuous actions, and in such labours as are
acceptable to thee. Enable me to resist and repel every
inordinate emotion of sloth, gluttony, and carnality. Render my
heart enamoured of virtue, and inflamed with desires of thy
glorious presence. Help me to merit and preserve a good name by a
peaceable and pious life, to thy honor, _O Jesus!_ to my own
comfort, and the edification of others.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c. _as in the first petition_.
Our Father. Hail Mary.


                 The Third Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me effectual strength of
soul and body, to please thee in the performance of such virtuous
actions as may bring me to thy everlasting joy and felicity.
{494}
Grant me, O most merciful Saviour, a firm purpose to amend my
life, and to make atonement for the years past; those years,
alas! which I have lavished, to thy displeasure, in vain or
wicked thoughts, evil words, deeds, and habits. Make my heart
obedient to thy will, and ready, for thy love, to perform all the
works of mercy. Grant me the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which,
through a virtuous life, and a devout frequenting of thy most
holy sacraments, may at length conduct me to thy heavenly
kingdom.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.


                The Fourth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) comfort me, and grant me grace
to fix in thee my chief joy and only felicity; inspire me with
heavenly meditations, spiritual sweetness, and fervent desires of
thy glory; ravish my soul with the contemplation of heaven, where
I hope to dwell everlastingly with thee. Bring thy unspeakable
goodness to my frequent recollection, and let me always with
gratitude remember thy gifts; but when thou bringest the
multitude of the sins whereby I have so ungratefully offended
thee, to sad remembrance, comfort me with the assurance of
pardon; and by the spirit of true penance purging away my guilt,
prepare me for the possession of thy heavenly kingdom.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.

{495}

               The Fifth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) make me constant in faith,
hope, and charity. Grant me perseverance in virtue, and a
resolution never to offend thee. May the memory of thy passion,
and of those bitter pains thou didst suffer for my sake, fortify
my patience, and refresh my soul under every tribulation and
adversity. Render me a strenuous professor of the Catholic faith,
and a diligent frequenter of my religious duties. Let me not be
blinded by the delights of a deceitful world, nor my fortitude
shaken by internal frauds or carnal temptations. My heart has for
ever fixed its repose in thee, and resolved to contemn all things
for thine eternal reward.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.

The Lord Jesus "Christ, for our sakes, became obedient unto
death, even the death of the cross."
  _Philippians_ ii.

Hear these petitions, O most merciful Saviour, and grant me the
grace frequently to repeat and consider them, that they may serve
as so many easy steps, whereby my soul may ascend to thy
knowledge and love, and to a diligent performance of my duty to
thee and my neighbour, through the whole course of my life.--
Amen.

Our Father. Hail Mary. I believe in God.

{496}

                   Second Part.

  Begin as before, saying, "At the name of Jesus let every knee
  bend, both in heaven, on earth, and under the earth," &c, as in
  part the first, _page_ 492.


                 The Sixth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) enlighten me with a spiritual
wisdom, whereby I may arrive at a knowledge of thy goodness, and
of every thing which is most acceptable to thee. Grant me a
perfect apprehension of my only good, and a discretion to
regulate my life accordingly. Grant me wisely to proceed from
virtue to virtue, till at length I enjoy a clear sight of thy
glory. Forbid it, dear Lord, that I return to the sins of which I
accused myself at the tribunal of confession. Let others be
edified by my pious example, and my enemies mollified by my good
counsel.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c, _as before, page_ 493. Our
Father. Hail Mary.


              The Seventh Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me grace inwardly to
fear thee, and avoid every occasion whatsoever of offending thee.
Let the threats of the torments prepared for sinners, the dread
of the loss of thy love and of thy heavenly inheritance, always
keep me in awe. Suffer me not to slumber in sin, but rather rouse
me to repentance, lest through thine anger I may be overtaken by
the sentence of eternal wrath, and endless damnation.
{497}
Let the powerful intercession of thy blessed mother, and of all
thy saints, but above all, thine own merits and mercy, serve as a
rampart between my poor soul and thy avenging justice.--Enable
me, O my God! to work out my salvation with fear and trembling,
and the apprehension of thy sacred judgments. Make me a more
humble and diligent suitor to the throne of thy mercy.

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.


               The Eighth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me the grace truly to
love thee, for thine infinite goodness, and those excessive
bounties I have received, or shall ever hope to receive from
thee. Let the recollection of thy benignity and patience conquer
the malice and wretched propensity of my perverse nature. May the
consideration of the many deliverances, frequent calls, and
continual helps, I have received from thee during the course of
my life, make me blush at my ingratitude. Ah, what return dost
thou require of me for all thy mercies, but that I love thee! And
why dost thou require it? Because thou art my only good!--thou
art my dear Lord! the sole object of my life; and I will
diligently keep thy commandments, because I truly love thee.

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.


               The Ninth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me the grace always to
remember my latter end, and the account I am to give in after
death; that so my soul may be always well disposed, and ready to
depart out of this life in thy grace and favour.
{498}
At that important hour, by the powerful intercession of thy
blessed mother, the glorious assistance of St. Michael, and my
good angel, rescue my poor soul, O Lord, from the snares of the
enemy of my salvation. Remember then thy mercy, O dear Jesus! and
hide not thy face from me on account of my offences. Secure me
against the terrors of that awful period, by causing me now to
die daily to all earthly things, and to have my conversation
continually in heaven. Let the remembrance of thy death teach me
to set a just value on life; and the memory of thy resurrection
encourage me to descend cheerfully to the grave.

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.


               The Tenth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) send me my purgatory in this
life, and thus prevent me from being tormented in the cleansing
fire which awaits those souls who have not been sufficiently
purified in this world. Vouchsafe to grant me those merciful
crosses and afflictions which thou seest necessary for weaning my
affections from things here below. Suffer not my heart to find
any repose but in sighing after thee, since no one can see thee,
who loves any thing which is not for thy sake. Too bitter, alas!
will be the anguish of the soul that desires to be united to
thee, and whose separation is retarded by the heavy chains of
sin.
{499}
Keep me then, O my Saviour, continually mortified in this world,
that being purified thoroughly with the fire of thy love, I may
pass from hence to the immediate possession of thee in
everlasting glory.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c. &c. _as at the conclusion of the
fifth petition, page_ 495.


                  Third Part.

  Begin as before, saying, "At the name of Jesus let every knee
  bend," &c., _page_ 492.


               The Eleventh Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me grace to avoid bad
company; or, if I should chance to come in the midst of such,
preserve me from being infected with the least temptation to
mortal sin, through the merits of thine uncorrupt conversation
among sinners. Art thou not always present, O Lord? and wilt thou
not take an exact account of all our words and actions, and judge
us accordingly? How then dare I converse with liars, slanderers,
drunkards, or blasphemers; or with such whose discourse is either
vain, quarrelsome, or dissolute?--Repress in me, dear Jesus,
every inordinate affection to carnal pleasures, and to delights
of taste; and strengthen me by thy grace to avoid such company as
would enkindle the flames of those unruly appetites. May thy
power, thy wisdom, and thy fatherly compassion defend, direct,
and chastise me; and cause me to lead such a life here amongst
men, as may qualify me hereafter for the conversation of angels.

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.

{500}

               The Twelfth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me the grace to call on
thee for help in all my necessities, and frequently to remember
thy death and resurrection. Wilt thou be deaf to my cries, who
hast laid down thy life for my ransom? or canst thou not save me,
who took it up again for my crown? _Call on me in the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee_. Whom have I in heaven but
thee, O my Jesus! from whose blessed mouth issued such balmy
words? Thou art my sure rock of defence against all mine enemies,
and my gracious assistant in every good work. I will, then,
invoke thee with confidence in all my trials and afflictions, and
when thou hearest me, O Jesus! thou wilt have mercy on me.

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.


              The Thirteenth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) enable me to persevere in a
virtuous life, and never to grow weary in thy service till thou
rewardest me in thy kingdom. In pious customs, holy duties, and
in all honest and necessary employments, continue, O Lord, to
strengthen me, both in soul and body. My life is nothing on earth
but a pilgrimage towards the heavenly Jerusalem, to which he that
sits down, or turns out of the way, can never arrive.
{501}
May I always, O Jesus! follow thy blessed example. With how much
pain, and how little pleasure, didst thou press on to a bitter
death, that being the assured way to a glorious resurrection. Let
me frequently meditate on those severe words of thine: _He only
that perseveres to the end shall be saved._

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.


            The Fourteenth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me grace to fix my mind
on thee, especially whilst I converse with thee in time of
prayer. Check the wanderings of my fanciful brain, put a stop to
the desires of my fickle heart, and suppress the power of my
spiritual enemies, who at that time endeavour to withdraw my mind
from heavenly thoughts to vain imaginations. Thus shall I
joyfully look on thee as my deliverer from all evil, and thank
thee as my benefactor for all the good I have received, or hope
to obtain. I shall be convinced that thou art my chief good, and
that all other things were ordained by thee only as the means of
engaging me to fix my affections on thee alone; that by
persevering till death in thy love and service, I might be
eternally happy. Let all my thoughts, O beloved of my soul! be
absorbed in thee, that my eyes being shut to all vain and sinful
objects, may become worthy to behold thee face to face in thy
everlasting glory.

Have mercy, &c. Our Father. Hail Mary.

{502}

             The Fifteenth Petition.

Jesus! (_repeated ten times_) grant me the grace to order my
life with reference to my eternal welfare, sincerely intending,
and wisely referring all the operations of my soul and body
towards obtaining the reward of thy infinite bliss and eternal
felicity. For what else is this world but a school for the
tutoring of souls created for eternal happiness in the next? And
how are they educated but by an anxious desire of enjoying God,
their only end? Break my froward spirit, O Jesus! by the reins of
humility and obedience. Grant me grace to depart hence with the
most sovereign contempt of this world, and with a heart
overflowing with joy at the thoughts of going to thee. Let the
memory of thy passion make me cheerfully undergo every temptation
or suffering in this state of probation, for love of thee; whilst
my soul, in the mean time, languishes after that life of
consummate bliss and immortal glory, which thou hast prepared for
thy servants in heaven. O Jesus! let me frequently and
attentively consider, that whatsoever I may gain, If I lose thee,
all is lost; and that whatever I may lose, if I obtain thee, all
is gained.

Have mercy on all sinners, &c, _as in page_ 493.

{503}

                 The Rosary Of
            The Blessed Name Of Jesus.

	                +

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips, and my tongue shall declare thy
praise.

Incline unto my aid, O God.

O Lord, hasten to help me.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever. Amen.


       The Five Mysteries Of The First Part.

I.--_The Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ._

                 The Meditation.

The Son of God assumes human flesh, of the pure blood of the
blessed Mary ever virgin, and is made man in her womb.

O Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on us. [_Ten times_.]
Glory be to the Father, &c.


II.--_The Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ_.

                 The Meditation.

The Saviour of the world is born for our redemption; his mother
remaining a virgin.

{504}

O Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on us. [_Ten times_.]
Glory, &c.


III.--_The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ._

               The Meditation.

Our Saviour being eight days old, begins to suffer for our sins,
and his blood already flows for us. He is circumcised according
to the law, as if he had been himself a sinner.

O Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on us. [_Ten times_.]
Glory, &c.


IV.--_Our Lord Jesus Christ is found in the Temple._

                The Meditation.

Our Saviour being twelve years old, shows himself more than
mortal, by his knowledge and wisdom, teaching the very teachers
of the Jews.

O Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on us. [_Ten times_.]
Glory, &c.


V.--_The Baptism of our Lord Jesus Christ_.

                 The Meditation.

The Saviour of the world is baptised by St. John. The eternal
Father declares him to be his Son.

O Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on us. [_Ten times_.]
Glory, &c.

{505}
                    The Prayer.

O Jesus! whose name is above all names; that in the name of Jesus
every knee may bend, of those that are in heaven, on earth, and
in hell; who, at the time appointed by the eternal wisdom,
assumedst flesh in the womb of the blessed Mary, ever virgin, and
thus became the Son of David, whose birth gladdened men and
angels; who began so early to suffer for us, and to shed, on our
account, that blood that washeth away the sins of the world;
whose eternal wisdom appeared at the age of twelve years; to
whose baptism all heaven was attentive; grant to us to celebrate
those mysteries to thy honour and our own salvation: who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, livest and reignest, one God, for all
eternity. Amen.


     The Five Mysteries Of The Second Part.

I.--_Our Saviour washeth his Disciples' feet_.

                The Meditation.

Our Saviour, to show us an example of humility, and how much we
ought to serve each other, descended so low as to wash the feet
of his disciples, though he is the God whom heaven and earth
adore.

O Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.


II.--_The Prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Garden_.

                  The Meditation.

Our Saviour, knowing his passion to be now at hand, is so
affected with the thoughts of it, and so oppressed with the load
of our sins, that he prays to his almighty Father, that the
bitter cup might pass away from him.

{506}

O Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times._] Glory, &c.


III.--_Our Saviour is apprehended._

                  The Meditation.

Our Saviour, as if he had been no more than mortal, yields to the
power of men, and permits himself, for our redemption, to be
apprehended, as if he were a malefactor.

O Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times._] Glory, &c.


IV.--_Our Saviour carries his Cross._

                The Meditation.

Our Saviour, being torn with scourges, and pierced with thorns,
to expiate our sins, is compelled to carry the cross on which he
is to die, and moves on in anguish and sorrow towards the place
of his execution.

O Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.


V.--_The Descent of our Saviour into Hell_.

                  The Meditation.

The soul of our Saviour being separated by death from the body,
descends to that place where the saints were expecting their
redemption.

{507}

O Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.


                  The Prayer.

O Jesus, whose name is above all names; that at the name of Jesus
every knee may bend, of those that are in heaven, on earth, and
in hell; whose mysterious humiliation and sorrows, appointed for
thee on account of our sins, appeared in the washing of the feet
of thy servants and creatures, in thy distress, and prayer, and
bloody sweat; in thy being secured and brought before tribunals
as a criminal; in thy bearing the load of the cross, and in the
separation of thy soul from the body, and its descent to the
regions below: grant to us to celebrate these mysteries to thy
honour and our own salvation; who, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, livest and reignest, one God, for all eternity. Amen.


    The Five Mysteries Of The Third Part.

I.--_The Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ_.

                The Meditation.

The soul of our Lord Jesus Christ, which had been separated from
the body, is re-united to it, by a miracle of the Almighty power;
and that body, which had been dead, rises to die no more.

O Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.

{508}

II.--_The Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ._

                 The Meditation.

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ ascends to the highest heaven,
where the Saviour of mankind sitteth at the right hand of God,
the almighty Father.

O Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.


III.--_Our Lord Jesus Christ sends down the Holy Ghost_.

                 The Meditation.

Our Saviour, now seated at the right hand of God, his almighty
Father, sends down the Holy Ghost, to inspire and animate his
disciples, that they may be qualified to publish to mankind his
cross and his glory.

O Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.


IV.--_Our Lord Jesus Christ crowning the blessed Virgin and Saints_.

                The Meditation.

Our Saviour, having by his passion, resurrection, and ascension,
opened the way for the sons of Adam to heaven, which they had
lost by sin, bestows on his Mother and his saints a crown of
immortal glory.

O Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.

{509}

V.--_Our Lord Jesus Christ coming to Judge Mankind._

                  The Meditation.

Our Saviour will come in power and majesty, to judge the living
and the dead, and to return to every one according to his works.

O Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us. [_Ten
times_.] Glory, &c.


                  The Prayer

O Jesus, whose name is above all names; that at the name of Jesus
every knee may bend, of those that are in heaven, on earth, and
in hell; whose body, that was murdered by mankind, the Almighty
raised from death, glorious and immortal; who, by thy ascension,
triumphed over death, and led captivity captive; who, according
to thy promise, sent down the Spirit, that proceedeth from the
Father and the Son, the comforter and the enlivener; who,
stretching forth the bounty of thy almighty hand, shed upon the
chosen children of Adam, that glory that neither eye hath seen,
nor ear hath heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man;
and who will come forth in power and majesty, to judge the living
and the dead, before whose throne all mortals will appear: grant
to us to celebrate these mysteries to thy honour, and our own
salvation; who, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, livest and
reignest one God for all eternity. Amen.

{510}

  "N.B.--The repeating of the above prayers or meditations, is
  not absolutely necessary. Those who cannot read or meditate on
  the mysteries, let them say the Creed beforehand in this
  Rosary, and in that of the blessed Virgin.

  "The devotions belonging to this Rosary, or the Rosary of the
  blessed Virgin, do not bind under sin.

  "N.B.--Those who are in the Society of the Rosary of the name
  of Jesus, may have the same plenary indulgence on New Year's
  Day, that is granted in the year of the Jubilee.

    "On every second Sunday in the month,

    "At the time of being received into the Society,

    "At the article of death,

    "And on each day of the fifteen mysteries."



          The Rosary Of The Blessed Virgin.

                        +
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

_Vers_. Hail, Mary, full of grace, our Lord is with thee:

_Resp_. Blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy womb, Jesus.

_Vers_. Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips.

_Resp_. And my tongue shall announce thy praise.

_Vers_. Incline unto mine aid, O God.

_Resp_. O Lord, make haste to help me.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

{511}

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world
without end. Amen. _Alleluia_.

[_From the Septuagesima to Easter, instead of_ Alleluia,
_say:_ Praise be to thee, O Lord, King of eternal glory.]


                  Part The First.

            The Five Joyful Mysteries,

  To be said on all Mondays and Thursdays, the Sundays of Advent,
  and after Epiphany till Lent.


I.--_The Annunciation._

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the angel Gabriel saluted
our blessed Lady with the title of "_Full of Grace_," and
declared unto her the incarnation of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.

_Then say_, Our Father, &c. _once; and_ Hail Mary, &c.
_ten times_.


  [When the "Hail Mary" is repeated a tenth time, the Decade
  finishes with, "Glory be to the Father." &c.; then follows the
  Prayer. Which method is to be observed in beginning, and saying
  each part of the Rosary.]


                   Let Us Pray.

O holy Mary, Queen of virgins, through the most high mystery of
the incarnation of thy beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, by
means of which the work of our salvation was so happily begun,
obtain for us, by thine intercession, light to be sensible of so
great a benefit, which he hath bestowed upon as; vouchsafing
thereby to make himself our brother, and thee, his only beloved
mother, our mother also. Amen.

{512}

             II.--_The Visitation_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary,
understanding from the angel that her cousin, St. Elizabeth, had
conceived, went with haste into the mountains of Judea, to visit
her, and remained with her three months.

Our Father, &c.


                Let Us Pray.

O holy Virgin, most spotless mirror of humility, by that
exceeding charity which moved thee to visit thy holy cousin, St.
Elizabeth, obtain for us, by thine intercession, that our hearts
may be visited by thy most holy Son, that being free from all
sin, we may praise and give him thanks for ever.
Amen.


III.--_The Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ in Bethlehem_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary,
when the time of her delivery was come, _brought forth our
Redeemer, Jesus Christ, at midnight, and laid him in a
manger_, because there was no room for him in the inns at
Bethlehem.

Our Father, &c.

{513}

                   Let Us Pray.

O most pure Mother of God, by thy virginal and most joyful
delivery, in which thou gavest unto the world thine only Son, our
Saviour, we beseech thee obtain for us, by thine intercession,
grace to lead such pure and holy lives in this world, that we may
worthily sing without ceasing, both day and night, the mercies of
thy Son, and his benefits to us by thee. Amen.


IV.--_The Oblation of our blessed Lord in the Temple._

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the most blessed Virgin
Mary, on the day of her purification, presented the child Jesus
in the temple, where holy Simeon, giving thanks to God with great
devotion, received him into his arms.

Our Father, &c.

                   Let Us Pray.

O holy Virgin, most admirable mistress, and pattern of obedience,
who didst present in the temple the Lord of the temple, obtain
for us of thy beloved Son, that, with holy Simeon and devout
Anna, we may praise and glorify him for ever. Amen.


V.--_The finding of the Child Jesus in the Temple_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary
having lost, without any fault of hers, her beloved Son in
Jerusalem, she sought him for the space of three days, and at
length found him the fourth day in the temple, in the midst of
the doctors, disputing with them, being of the age of twelve
years. Our Father, &c.

{514}

                  Let Us Pray.

Most blessed Virgin, more than martyr in thy sufferings, and yet
the comfort of such as are afflicted, by that unspeakable joy
wherewith thy soul was ravished, at finding thy beloved Son in
the temple, in the midst of the doctors, disputing with them,
obtain of him for us, so to seek him and find him in the holy
Catholic Church, that we may never be separated from him. Amen.


              The Salve Regina.

Hail! holy Queen, Mother of Mercy,
our life, our sweetness, and our hope.
To thee do we cry, poor banished sons of Eve.
To thee do we send up our sighs, mournings,
and weepings, in this valley of tears.
Turn, then, most gracious advocate, thine eyes of
mercy towards us, and after this our exile
ended, show unto us the blessed fruit of thy
womb, Jesus, O clement, O pious, O sweet Virgin Mary.

_Vers_. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God.

_Resp_. That we may be made worthy of the promises of
Christ.

{515}

                  Let Us Pray.

O God, whose only begotten Son, by his life, death, and
resurrection, has purchased for us the rewards of eternal life,
grant we beseech thee, that meditating upon those mysteries, in
the most holy Rosary of the most blessed Virgin Mary, we may
imitate what they contain, and obtain what they promise: through
the same Christ our Lord. Amen.


                   Part The Second.

           The Five Dolorous Mysteries,

  To be said on Tuesdays and Fridays throughout the Year, and on
  Sundays in Lent.


I.--_The Prayer and Bloody Sweat of our Blessed Saviour in the
Garden_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord Jesus was so
afflicted for us in the Garden of Gethsemani, that his body was
bathed in a bloody sweat, which ran trickling down in great drops
to the ground.

Our Father, &c. Hail Mary, &c. Glory, &c. _as before_.


                   Let Us Pray.

Most holy Virgin, more than martyr, by that ardent prayer which
thy most beloved Son poured forth unto his Father in the Garden,
vouchsafe to intercede for us, that our passions being reduced to
the obedience of reason, we may always, and in all things,
conform and subject ourselves to the will of God. Amen.

{516}

II.--_The Scourging of our Blessed Lord at the Pillar_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ was
most cruelly scourged in Pilate's house, the number of stripes
they gave him being above five thousand. [As it was revealed to
St. Bridget.] Our Father, &c.


                   Let Us Pray.

O Mother of God, overflowing fountain of patience, by those
stripes thine only and most beloved Son vouchsafed to suffer for
us, obtain of him for us grace, that we may know how to mortify
our rebellious senses, and cut off all occasions of sinning, with
that sword of grief and compassion which pierced thy most tender
soul. Amen.


III.--_The Crowning of our Blessed Saviour with Thorns_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how those cruel ministers of
Satan platted a crown of sharp thorns, and most cruelly pressed
it on the most sacred head of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Our Father, &c.


                   Let Us Pray.

O Mother of our eternal Prince and King of Glory, by those sharp
thorns wherewith his holy head was pierced, we beseech thee, that
by thine intercession we may be delivered here from all motions
of pride, and in the day of judgment from that confusion which
our sins deserve. Amen.

{517}

IV.--_Jesus carrying the Cross_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ
being sentenced to die, bore, with the most amazing patience, the
cross which was laid upon him for his greater torment and
ignominy. Our Father, &c.


                  Let Us Pray.

O holy Virgin, example of patience, by the most painful carrying
the cross, on which thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ bore the heavy
weight of our sins, obtain of him for us by thine intercession,
courage and strength to follow his steps, and bear our cross
after him to the end of our lives. Amen.


V.--_The Crucifixion of our Lord Jesus Christ_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, having arrived at Mount Calvary, was stripped of
his clothes, and his hands and feet most cruelly nailed to the
cross, in the presence of his most afflicted mother.

Our Father, &c.


                   Let Us Pray.

O holy Mary, mother of God, as the body of thy beloved Son was
for us extended on the cross, so may our desires be daily more
and more stretched out in his service, and our hearts wounded
with compassion for his most bitter passion. And thou, O most
blessed Virgin, graciously vouchsafe to help us to accomplish the
work of our salvation, by thy powerful intercession. Amen.

{518}

Hail, holy Queen, &c. _with the verse and prayer as before_.


                Part The Third.

         The Five Glorious Mysteries,

Assigned for Wednesdays and Saturdays throughout the Year, and
Sundays from Easter until Advent.


I.--_The Resurrection of Christ from the Dead_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ,
triumphing gloriously over death, rose again the third day,
immortal and impassable.

Our Father, &c. Hail Mary, &c. Glory, &c, _as before_.


                   Let Us Pray.

O glorious Virgin Mary, by that unspeakable joy thou receivedst
in the resurrection of thine only Son, we beseech thee to obtain
of him for us, that our hearts may never go astray after the
false joys of this world; but may be ever and wholly employed in
the pursuit of the only true and solid joys of heaven. Amen.


II.--_The Ascension of Christ into Heaven_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ,
forty days after his resurrection, ascended into heaven, attended
by angels, in the sight of his most holy Mother, his holy
apostles and disciples, to the great admiration of them all.

Our Father, &c.

{519}

                    Let Us Pray.

O mother of God, comfort of the afflicted, as thy beloved Son,
when he ascended into heaven, lifted up his hands and blessed his
apostles, so vouchsafe, most holy Mother, to lift up thy pure
hands to him for us, that we may enjoy the benefits of his
blessing and thine, here on earth, and hereafter in heaven. Amen.


III.--_The coming of the Holy Ghost to the Disciples_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ,
being seated at the right hand of God, sent, as he had promised,
the Holy Ghost upon the apostles, who, after he was ascended,
returning to Jerusalem, continued in prayer and supplication with
the blessed Virgin Mary, expecting the performance of his
promise.

Our Father, &c.

                   Let Us Pray.

O sacred Virgin, tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, we beseech thee,
obtain by thine intercession, that this most sweet Comforter,
whom thy beloved Son sent down upon his apostles, filling them
thereby with spiritual joy, may teach us in this world the true
way of salvation, and make us walk in the paths of virtue and
good works. Amen.

IV.--_The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary into Heaven_.

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the glorious Virgin,
twelve years after the resurrection of her Son, passed out of
this world unto him, and was by him taken into heaven,
accompanied by the holy angels.

Our Father, &c.

{520}

                   Let Us Pray.

O most prudent Virgin, who entering into the heavenly palace,
didst fill the holy angels with joy, and man with hope, vouchsafe
to intercede for us at the hour of death, that free from the
illusions and temptations of the devil, we may joyfully and
successfully pass out of this temporal state, to enjoy the
happiness of eternal life. Amen.


V.--_The Coronation of the B.V.M, in Heaven._

Let us contemplate in this mystery, how the glorious Virgin Mary
was, with great jubilee, and exultation of the whole court of
heaven, and the particular glory of all the saints, crowned by
her Son with the brightest diadem of Glory.

Our Father, &c.


                   Let Us Pray.

O glorious Queen of all the heavenly citizens, we beseech thee to
accept this Rosary, which, as a crown of roses, we offer at thy
feet; and grant, most gracious Lady, that by thine intercession,
our souls may be inflamed with so ardent a desire of seeing thee
so gloriously crowned, that it may never die in us, until it be
changed into the happy fruition of thy blessed sight. Amen.

Hail, holy Queen, &c,
_with the verse and prayer as before_.

{521}

                     Te Deum;

_A Hymn which may be said after Mass, or on occasion of any
public or private Thanksgiving._

  Thee, sovereign God, our grateful accents praise,
  We own thee Lord, and bless thy wondrous ways;
  To thee, eternal Father, earth's whole frame
  With loudest trumpet sounds immortal fame.
  Lord God of hosts! to thee the heavenly pow'rs
  With sounding anthems, fill thy vaulted tow'rs;
  The Cherubim thrice holy, holy, cry,
  Thrice holy, all the Seraphim reply,
  And thrice returning echoes endless songs supply.
  Both heaven and earth thy majesty display;
  They owe their beauty to thy glorious ray.
  Thy praises fill the loud apostles' choir;
  The train of prophets in the song conspire;
  Legions of martyrs in the chorus shine;
  And vocal blood with vocal music join.
  By these thy church, inspir'd with heavenly art,
  Around the world maintains a second part.
  And tunes her sweetest notes, O God, to thee.
  The Father of unbounded majesty,
  The Son, ador'd co-partner of thy seat,
  And equal everlasting Paraclete.
  Thou King of glory. Christ; of the Most High,
  Thou co-eternal filial Deity.
  Thou who, to save the world's impending doom,
  Vouchsafedst to dwell within a virgin's womb;
  Old tyrant death disarmed, before thee flew
  The bolts of heav'n, and back the foldings drew,
  To give access, and make the faithful way;
  From God's right hand thy filial beams display.
  Thou art to judge the living and the dead;
  Then spare those souls for whom thy veins have bled.

  O take us then among the blest above,
  To share with them thy everlasting love.
  Preserve, O Lord, thy people, and enhance
  Thy blessing on thine own inheritance:
  For ever raise their hearts, and rule their ways:
  Each day we bless thee, and proclaim thy praise.
  No age shall fail to celebrate thy name,
  Nor hour neglect thy everlasting fame.

{522}

  Preserve our souls, O Lord, this day from ill,
  Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy still.
  As we have hop'd, do thou reward our pain.
  We've hop'd in thee, let not our hope be vain.

  V. Let us bless the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

  R. Let us praise and extol him for ever.


          The Prayer, _Deus cujus._

O God, of whose mercies there is no number, and of whose goodness
the treasure is infinite, we humbly thank thy most gracious
majesty for the favours thou hast bestowed on us; ever beseeching
thy clemency, that as thou grantest our requests when we humbly
ask thee, so thou wouldst not forsake us, but dispose us for the
rewards of the life to come. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen.



             The Thirty Days' Prayer

To The Blessed Virgin Mary, In Honour Of The Sacred Passion Of
Our Lord Jesus Christ;

  By the devout recital of which for the above space of time, we
  may mercifully hope to obtain our lawful request.--It is
  particularly recommended as a proper devotion for every day in
  Lent, and all the Fridays throughout the Year.


Ever glorious and blessed Mary, Queen of Virgins, Mother of
Mercy, hope and comfort of dejected and desolate souls; through
that sword of sorrow which pierced thy tender heart, whilst thine
only son, Christ Jesus our Lord, suffered death and ignominy on
the cross; through that filial tenderness and pure love he had
for thee, grieving in thy grief, whilst from his cross he
recommended thee to the care and protection of his beloved
disciple St. John; take pity, I beseech thee, on my poverty and
necessities; have compassion on my anxieties and cares; assist
and comfort me in all my infirmities and miseries, of what kind
soever.
{523}
Thou art the mother of mercies, the sweet consolatrix and only
refuge of the needy and the orphan, of the desolate and the
afflicted. Cast, therefore, an eye of pity on a miserable,
forlorn child of Eve, and hear my prayer; for since, in just
punishment for my sins, I find myself encompassed by a multitude
of evils, and oppressed with much anguish of spirit, whither can
I fly for more secure shelter, O amiable Mother of my Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, than under the wings of thy maternal
protection? Attend, therefore, I beseech thee, with an ear of
pity and compassion, to my humble and earnest request. I ask it
through the bowels of mercy of thy dear Son, through that love
and condescension wherewith he embraced our nature, when, in
compliance with the divine will, thou gavest thy consent, and
whom, after the expiration of nine months, thou didst bring forth
from the chaste enclosure of thy womb, to visit this world, and
bless it with his presence. I ask it through that anguish of mind
wherewith thy beloved Son, our dear Saviour, was overwhelmed on
Mount Olivet, when he besought his eternal Father _to remove
from him_, if possible, _the bitter chalice_ of his
future passion. I ask it through the threefold repetition of his
prayers in the garden, from whence afterwards with dolorous steps
and mournful tears, thou didst accompany him to the doleful
theatre of his death and sufferings.
{524}
I ask it through the welts and sores of his virginal flesh,
occasioned by the cords and whips wherewith he was bound and
scourged, when stripped of his seamless garment, for which his
executioners afterwards cast lots. I ask it through the scoffs
and ignominies by which he was insulted; the false accusation and
unjust sentence by which he was condemned to death, and which he
bore with heavenly patience. I ask it through his bitter tears
and bloody sweat, his silence and resignation, his sadness and
grief of heart. I ask it through the blood which trickled from
his royal and sacred head, when struck with a sceptre of a reed,
and pierced with his crown of thorns. I ask it through the
excruciating torments he suffered when his hands and feet were
fastened with gross nails to the tree of the cross. I ask it
through his vehement thirst, and bitter potion of vinegar and
gall. I ask it through his dereliction on the cross, when he
exclaimed: "My God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me?" I ask it
through his mercy extended to the good thief, and through his
recommending his precious soul and spirit into the hands of his
eternal Father before he expired, saying: "All is finished." I
ask it through the blood mixed with water, which issued from his
sacred side, when pierced with a lance, and whence a flood of
grace and mercy has flowed to us. I ask it through his immaculate
life, bitter passion, and ignominious death on the cross, at
which nature itself was thrown into convulsions, by the bursting
of rocks, rending of the veil of the temple, the earthquake, and
darkness of the sun and moon.
{525}
I ask it through his descent into hell, where he comforted the
saints of the old law with his presence, and led captivity
captive. I ask it through his glorious victory over death, when
he arose again to life on the third day; and through the joy
which his appearance for forty days after, gave thee, his blessed
Mother, his apostles, and the rest of his disciples, when, in
thine and their presence, he miraculously ascended into heaven. I
ask it through the grace of the Holy Ghost, infused into the
hearts of the disciples, when he descended upon them in the form
of fiery tongues, and by which they were inspired with zeal in
the conversion of the world, when they went to preach the gospel.
I ask it through the awful appearance of thy Son at the last
dreadful day, when he shall come to judge the living and the
dead, and the world, by fire. I ask it through the compassion he
bore thee in this life, and the ineffable joy thou didst feel at
thine assumption into heaven, where thou art eternally absorbed
in the sweet contemplation of his divine perfections. O glorious
and ever blessed Virgin! comfort the heart of thy suppliant, by
obtaining it for me.[Footnote 5]

    [Footnote 5: Here mention, or reflect on your lawful request,
    under the reservation of its being agreeable to the will of
    God, who sees whether it will contribute towards your
    spiritual good.]

{526}

And as I am persuaded my divine Saviour doth honour thee as his
beloved Mother, to whom he can refuse nothing; so let me speedily
experience the efficacy of thy powerful intercession, according
to the tenderness of thy maternal affection, and his filial,
loving heart, who mercifully granteth the requests, and complieth
with the desires of those that love and fear him. Wherefore, O
most blessed Virgin, besides the object of my present petition,
and whatever else I may stand in need of, obtain for me also, of
thy dear Son, our Lord and our God, a lively faith, firm hope,
perfect charity, true contrition of heart, unfeigned tears of
compunction, sincere confession, condign satisfaction, abstinence
from sin, love of God, and my neighbour, contempt of the world,
patience to suffer affronts and ignominies, nay, even, if
necessary, an opprobrious death itself, for the love of thy Son
our Saviour Jesus Christ.--Obtain likewise for me, O Sacred
Mother of God! perseverance in good works, performance of good
resolutions, mortification of self will, a pious conversation
through life, and at my last moments, strong and sincere
repentance, accompanied by such a lively and attentive presence
of mind, as may enable me to receive the last sacrament of the
Church worthily, and die in thy friendship and favour. Lastly,
obtain, I beseech thee, for the souls of my parents, brethren,
relations, and benefactors, both living and dead, life
everlasting. Amen.

{527}

               Hymns For Festivals.



              Hymn _for Advent_.

Alma Redemptoris Mater, quæ pervia cœli porta manes,

    Mother of Jesus, heaven's open gate,

Et stella maris, succurre cadenti;

    Star of the Sea, support the falling state

Surgere qui curat populo; tu quæ genuisti,

    Of mortals: thou, whose womb thy maker bore,

Natura mirante tuum sanctum genitorem:

    And yet, strange thing! a virgin as before;

Virgo priùs ac posteriús, Gabrielis ab ore

    Who didst from _Gabriel's_ hail! the news receive,

Sumens illud Ave, peccatorum miserere.

    Repenting sinners by thy prayers relieve.

V. Angelus Domini nuntiavit Mariæ.

    V. The angel of the Lord declared to _Mary_,

R. Et concepit de Spiritu Sancto.

    B. And she conceived of the Holy Ghost.


           Hymn _for Christmas._

Adeste fidelis, Læti triumph antes,

    Ye faithful souls, rejoice and sing;

Venite, venite in Bethlehem:

    To Bethlehem your trophies bring,

Natem videte Regem Angelorum:

    Before the new-born Angel's King:

Venite adoremus,
Venite adoremus Dominum.

    Come let us him adore, Come, &c.


Deum de Deo, Lumen de Lumine,

    True God of God, true Light of Light,

Gestant puellæ viscera; Deum verum,

    Born in womb of Virgin bright;

Genitum non factum:

    Begot, not made; true God of might:

Venite adoremus, Venite, &c.

    Come let us him adore, Come, &c.

{528}

Cantet nunc Io, Chorus angelorum;

    Angelic choirs with joy now sing,

Cantet nunc aula cœlestium,

    The heavenly courts with echoes ring.

Gloria In excelsis Deo:

    Glory on high to God our king:

Venite adoremus, Venite, &c.

    Come, let us him adore, Come, &c.


Ergo qui natus Die hodierna,

    Jesus, whose life this day begun,

Jesu tibi sit gloria:
  Patris æterni
  _Verbum caro factum:_

    The Father's co-eternal Son: Glory to him be ever sung:

Venite adoremus, Venite, &c.

    Come, let us him adore, Come, &c.


  Hymn _for Passion-Sunday, and Palm-Sunday_.

Vexilla regis prodeunt,

    Behold the royal ensigns fly,

Fulget crucis mysterium:

    Bearing the cross' mystery:

Quâ vita mortem protulit,

    Where life itself did death endure,

Et morte vitam protulit.

    And by that death did life procure.

Quæ vulnerata lanceæ

    A cruel spear let out a flood

Mucrone diro, criminum

    Of water, mixed with saving blood:

Ut nos lavaret fordibus,

    Which, gushing from the Saviour's side,

Manavit undâ et sanguine.

    Drown'd our offences in the tide.


Impleta sunt quæ concinit,

    The mystery we now unfold,

David fideli carmine,

    Which David's faithful verse foretold.

Dicendo nationibus:

    Of our Lord's kingdom; whilst we see

Regnavit â ligno Deus.

    God ruling nations from a tree.

{529}

Arbor decora et fulgida,

    O lovely tree, whose branches wore

Ornata regis purpura!

    The royal purple of his gore!

Electa digno stipite,

    How glorious does thy body shine?

Tam sancta membra tangere!

    Supporting members so divine!

Beata, cujus brachiis,

    The world's blest balance thou wast made,

Pretiùm pependit sæculi,

    Thy happy beam its purchase weigh'd,

Statera facta corporis,

    And bore his limbs, who snatch'd away

Tulitque prædam tartari.

    Devouring hell's expected prey.

O Crux, ave spes unica,

    Hail Cross, our hope! on thee we call,

Hoc passionis tempore!

    Who keep this mournful festival:

Piis ad auge gratiam,

    Grant to the just increase of grace,

Reisque dele crimina.

    And ev'ry sinner's crimes efface.

Te, fons salutis Trinitas, Collaudit omnis spiritus.

    Blest Trinity, we praises sing
    To thee, from whom all graces spring,

Quibus crucis victoriam,

    Celestial crowns on those bestow,

Largiris, adde præmium. Amen.

   Who conquer by the cross below. Amen.

V. Eripe me, Domine, ab homine malo.

    V. Deliver me, O Lord, from the wicked man.

R. A viro iniquo eripe me.

    R. And from the unjust man deliver me.


             Hymn _for Good-Friday_,
            (Plaint of the Blessed Virgin.)

Stabat mater dolorosa

     Beneath the world's redeeming wood,

Juxta crucem lacrymosa,

    The most afflicted Mother stood,

{530}

Dum pendebat filius.

    Mingling her tears with her Son's blood.

Cujus animara gementem

    As that flow'd down from every part,

Contristatam et dolentem

     Of all his wounds she felt the smart;

Pertransivit gladius.

    What pierc'd his body, pierc'd her heart.

O quam tristis et afflicta,

    Who can with tearless eyes look on,

Fuit illa benedicta

    When Mary does, alas! bemoan

Mater unigeniti.

    Wounded and faint, her only Son.

Quæ merebat, et dolebat,

    O worse than _Jewish_ heart, that could,

Pia mater dum videbat,

    Unmov'd, behold the double flood

Nati pœnas inclyti.

    Of _Mary's_ tears, and _Jesu's_ blood.

Quis est homo, qui non fleret,

    Alas! our sins, they were not his

Christi matrem si videret
In tanto supplicio?

    In this atoning sacrifice,
    For which he bleeds, for which he dies.

Quis non posset contristari,

    When graves were open'd rocks were rent,

Piam matrim contemplari

    When nature and each element

Dolentem cum filio?

    His torments and her grief resent.

Pro peccatis suæ gentis

    Shall man, the cause of all his pain

Vidit Jesum in tormentis,

    And all his grief, shall sinful man

Et flagellis subditum.

    Alone insensible remain?

Vidit suum dulcem natum

    Ah, pious mother, teach my heart,

Morientem, desolatum,

    Of sighs and tears the holy art,

{531}

Dum emisit spiritum.

    And in thy grief to bear a part.

Eia, mater fons amoris,

    The sword of grief, which did pass through

Me sentire vim doloris
Fac ut tecum lugeam,

    Thy very soul, O may it now
    Upon my heart a wound bestow.

Fac ut ardeat cor meum,

    Great Queen of sorrows, in thy train

In amando Christum Deum,

    Let me a mourner's place obtain,

Ut sibi complaceam.

    Let me thy Jesus love again.

Sancta mater istud agas,
Crucifixi fige plagas,

    To heal the leprosy of sin,
    We must the cure with tears begin.

Cordi meo valide.

    All flesh's corrupt without their brine.

Tui nati vulnerari,

    Refuge of sinners, grant that we

Tam dignati pro me pati

    May tread thy steps, and let it be

Pœnas mecum divide.

    Our sorrow not to grieve like thee.

Fec me vere tecum flere,

    O may the wounds of thy dear Son,

Crucifixo condolere,

    Our contrite hearts possess alone.

Donec ego vixero.

    And all terrene affections drown.

Juxta crucem tecum stare,

    Those wounds, which now the stars outshine,

Te libenter sociare,

    Those furnaces of love divine.

In planctu desidero.

    May they our drossy souls refine;

Virgo virginum præclara,

   And on us such impressions make,

Mihi jam non sis amara,

    That we of suff'ring for his sake,

Fac me tecum plangere.

    May joyfully our portion take.

{532}

Fac ut portem Christi mortem,

    Let us his proper badge put on,

Passionis fac consortem,

    Let's glory in the cross alone,

Et plagas recolere.

    By which he marks us for his own.

Fac me plagis vulnerari,

    That when the dreadful trial's come,

Cruce hac inebriari,

    For every man to hear his doom,

Ob amorem filii.

    On his right hand we may find room.

Inflammatus et accensus,

    O hear us, _Mary! Jesus_, hear!

Per te virgo aim defensus

    Our humble pray'rs; secure our fear,

In die judicii.

    When thou in judgment shalt appear.

Fac me cruce custodiri,

    Now give us sorrow, give us love,

Morte Christi præmuniri Confoveri gratia.

    That so prepar'd we may remove,

Quando corpus morietur

     When call'd to seats of bliss above. Amen.

Fac ut animæ donetur
Paradisi gloria.

V. Tuam ipsius animam pertransivit gladius.

    V. A sword has pierced thy own soul.

R. Ut revelentur ex multis cordibus cogitationes.

    R. That the thoughts of many hearts may be
    revealed.


                      Hymn _for Easter_.


O filii et filiæ,

  Praise by mortals now be given,

Rex cœlestis, Rex gloriæ,

  On this day from death hath risen

Morte surrexit hodie, Alleluia.

  The King of Glory, King of Heaven, Alleluia,

{533}

Et mane prima Sabbati,

  The morn of Sabbath scarce did beam,

Ad ostium monumenti

  When to his monument there came

Accesserant discipuli, Alleluia.

  Disciples who ador'd his name, Alleluia.

Et Maria Magdalene,

  There _Mary Magdalen_ anxious stood.

Et Jacobi, et Salome,

  And _James_, and _Salome_ the good

Venerunt corpus ungere, Alleluia.

  His body fain embalm they would, Alleluia.

In albis sedens angelus

  The angel sat in white all rob'd,

Prædixit mulieribus,

  And to the women he foretold:

In Galilea est Dominus, Alleluia.

  In _Galilee_ you'll see the Lord, Alleluia.

Et Joannes apostolus

  The message scarce did greet his ear,

 Cucurrit Petro citùs,

  Swifter than _Peter, John_ drew near

Monumento venit priùs, Alleluia.

  To the Lord's tomb, with hope, with fear, Alleluia.

Discipulis astantibus,

  The disciples all assembled were;

In medio stetit Christus,

  Among them Jesus did appear,

Dicens, pax vobis omnibus, Alleluia.

  His peace he gave, remov'd their fear, Alleluia.

Ut intellexit Didymus

  _Thomas_ believed not, when 'twas said

Quia surrexerat Jesus,

  That Christ had risen from the dead,

Remansit fere dubius, Alleluia.

  Until he saw the wounds that bled, Alleluia.

Vide Thoma, vide latus,

  My hands, my side, my feet, O see!

Vide pedes, vide manus:

  _Thomas_, wounds that bled for thee:

Noli esse incrodulus, Alleluia.

  Renounce thine incredulity, Alleluia.

{534}

Quando Thomas vidit Christum

  When _Thomas_, Jesus had survey'd,

Pedes, manus, latus suum,

  And on his wounds his fingers laid,

Dixit: Tu es Deus meus, Alleluia.

  Thou art my Lord and God, he said, Alleluia.

Beati qui non viderunt,

  Blessed are they who have not seen,

Et firmiter crediderunt,

  And yet, whose faith entire hath been,

Vitam æternam habebunt, Alleluia.

  Them endless joy from pain shall screen, Alleluia.

In hoc festo sanctissimo

  On this most solemn feast let's raise

Sit laus et jubilatio:

  Our hearts to God in hymns of praise.

Benedicamus Domino, Alleluia.

  And bless the Lord in all his ways, Alleluia,

Ex quibus nos humillimas

  Our grateful thanks to God let's give,

Devotas atque debitas

  In humblest manner, whilst we live,

Deo dicamus gratias, Alleluia.

  For all the favours we receive, Alleluia.


    [Transcriber's note: This is a better translation (with
    music) from St. Gregory's Hymnal.
    https://www.gutenberg.org/files/23673/23673-h/English.html#No._28]

  Ye sons and daughters of the Lord!
  The King of glory, King adored,
  This day Himself from death restored. Alleluia!
  Alleluia!  Alleluia!  Alleluia!

  All in the early morning grey,
  Went holy women on their way,
  To see the tomb where Jesus lay. Alleluia!
  Alleluia!  Alleluia!  Alleluia!

  Of spices pure a precious store,
  In their pure hands those women bore,
  To anoint the Sacred Body o'er. Alleluia!
  Alleluia!  Alleluia!  Alleluia!

  Then straightway One in white they see,
  Who saith, "Ye seek the Lord; but He
  Is ris'n, and gone to Galilee." Alleluia!
  Alleluia!  Alleluia!  Alleluia!

  This told they Peter, told they John,
  Who forthwith to the tomb are gone;
  But Peter is by John outrun. Alleluia!
  Alleluia!  Alleluia!  Alleluia!

  That selfsame night, while out of fear,
  The doors were shut, their Lord most dear,
  To His Apostles did appear. Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

  But Thomas when of this He heard,
  Was doubtful of his brethren's word;
  Wherefore again there comes the Lord. Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

  "Thomas, behold My Side" saith He;
  "My Hands, My Feet, My Body see,
  And doubt not, but believe in Me." Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

  When Thomas saw that wounded Side,
  The truth no longer he denied;
  "Thou art my Lord and God," he cried. Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

  Oh, blest are they who have not seen
  Their Lord, and yet believe in Him:
  Eternal life awaiteth them. Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

  Now let us praise the Lord most high,
  And strive His Name to magnify,
  On this great day through earth and sky: Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

  Whose mercy ever runneth o'er,
  Whom men and Angel Hosts adore,
  To Him be glory ever more. Alleluia!
  Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!



             Hymns _for Whit-Sunday_.

Veni Creator Spiritus,

    Creating Spirit, come possess

Mentes tuorum visita,

    Our souls, and with thy presence bless:

Imple superna gratia,

    And in our hearts, fram'd by thy hand,

Quæ tu creasti, pectora.

    Let thy celestial grace command.

Qui diceris Paraclitus,

    Thou who art call'd the _Paraclete_,

Altissimi donum Dei;

    The Almighty Father's gift complete:

{535}

Fons vivus, ignis, charitas,

    The living fountain, fire, and love,

Et spiritalis unction.

    And sacred unction from above.

Tu septiformis munere,

    Thou finger of the Father's hand,

Digitus pateræ dexteræ,

    Who dost a sev'nfold grace command:

Tu rite promissum Patris,

    Thou promis'd from the Highest sent,

Sermone ditans guttura.

    In various language eloquent

Accende lumen sensibus:

    Purge with thy light our earthly parts.

Infunde amorem cordibus:

    And with thy love inflame our hearts:

Infirma nostri corporis

    Thus human weakness fortify

Virtute firmans perpeti.

    With everlasting constancy.

Hostem repellas longiùs,

    Far from us drive the infernal foe,

Pacemque dones protinùs,

    And peace, the fruit of love, bestow:

Ductore sic te prævio

    Thus having thee, our safest guide,

Vitemus omne noxium.

    Let not our feet to evil slide.

Per te sciamus da Patrem

    Let us by thee the Father own,

Noscamus atque Filium:

    And to us let thy Son be known:

Te utriusque Spiritum

    Let us believe in thee, who dost

Credamus omni tempore.

    From both proceed the Holy Ghost.

Deo Patri, sit gloria,

    To God the Father, and the Son,

Et Filio, qui a mortuis

    Who rose from death, be glory done:

Surrexit, ac Paraclito,

    This praise for ever let's repeat,

In sæculorum sæcula. Amen.

    To God the holy Paraclete, Amen.

{536}

V. Loquebantur variis linguis Apostoli, _Alleluia_.

    V. The Apostles spoke in various tongues. _Alleluia_.

R. Magnalia Dei, _Alleluia_,

    R. The wonders of God, _Alleluia_.



                    The Prayer.

O God, who by the light of the Holy Ghost, didst instruct the
hearts of the faithful, grant that by the direction of the same
Holy Spirit, we may relish what is right, and always rejoice in
his consolations: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


           _Sequence for Whit-Sunday_.

Veni Sancte Spiritus

    Come, Holy Ghost, send down those beams,

Et emitte cælitus

    Which sweetly flow in silent streams,

Lucis tuæ radium.

    From thy bright throne above.

Veni Pater pauperum:

    O come thou Father of the poor,

Veni dator munerum:

    Thou bounteous source of all our store,

Veni lumen cordium.

    Come fire our hearts with love.

Consolator optime,

    Come thou of comforters the best,

Dulcis hospes animæ,

    Come thou the soul's delicious guest,

Dulce refrigerium.

    The pilgrim's sweet relief.

In labore requies,

    Thou art our rest in toil and sweat,

In æstu temperies,

    Refreshment in excessive heat

In fletu solatium.

    And solace in our grief.

O lux beatissima,

    O sacred light, shoot home thy darts,

Reple cordis intima

    O pierce the centre of those hearts,

Tuorura fideliam.

    Whose faith aspires to thee.

{537}

Sine tuo numine,

    Without thy Godhead no thing can

Nihil est in homine,

    Have any price or worth in man:

Nihil est innoxium.

    Nothing can harmless be.

Lava quod est sordidum,

    Lord, wash our sinful stains away,

Riga quod est aridum,

    Water from heaven our barren clay,

Sana quod est saucium.

    Our wounds and bruises heal.

Flecte quod est rigidum,

    To thy sweet yoke our stiff necks bow,

Fove quod est frigidum,

    Warm with thy fire our hearts of snow,

Rege quod est devium.

    Our wand'ring feet repel.

Da tuis fidelibus,

    O grant thy faithful, dearest Lord,

In te confitentibus,

    Whose only hope is thy sure word,

Sacrum septenarium.

    The seven gifts of thy spirit.

Da virtutis meritum,

    Grant us in life to obey thy grace,

Da salutis exitum,

    Grant us in death to see thy face,

Da perenne gaudium. Amen.

    And endless joys inherit. Amen.


                   The Prayer.

O God, to whom every heart lies open, every will speaks its
desire, and from whom no secret is concealed; purify the thoughts
of our hearts by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in order that
we may perfectly love thee, and worthily praise thee: through our
Lord Jesus Christ, thy Son, who with thee and the same Holy Ghost
liveth, &c.
Amen.

{538}

                Hymns For Festivals.


  Hymns _for Corpus Christi, and for the Procession of
  the Blessed Sacrament, on Holy Thursday_.


Pange lingua gloriosi

  Sing, O my tongue, adore and praise

Corporis mysterium,

  The depth of God's mysterious ways:

Sanguinisque pretiosi

  How Christ, the world's great King, bestow'd

Quem in mundi pretium,

  His flesh conceal'd in human food,

Fructus ventris generosi,

  And left mankind the blood that paid

Rex effudit gentium.

  The ransom for the souls he made.

Nobis datis, nobus natus,

  Given from above, and born for man,

Ex intacta virgine;

  From virgin chaste his life began:

Et in mundo conversatus

  He liv'd on earth, and preached to sow

Sparso verbi semine,

  The seeds of heavenly love below;

Sui notas incolatus

  Then seal'd his mission from above

Miro clausit ordine!

  With strange effects of power and love!

In supremæ nocte cœnæ,

  'Twas on that ev'ning when the last

Recumbens cum fratribus,

  And most mysterious supper past;

Observata lege plene

  When Christ with his disciples sat,

Cibis in legalibus,

  To close the law with legal meat;

Cibum turbæ duodense

  Then to the twelve himself bestow'd

Se dat suis manibus.

  With his own hands to be their food.

{539}

Verbum caro, panem verum,

  The Word made flesh for love of man,

Verbo carnem efficit:

  His word turns bread to flesh again,

Fitque sanguis Christi merum,

  And wine to blood, unseen by sense,

Et si sensus deficit,

  By virtue of omnipotence:

Ad firmandum cor sincerum

  And here the faithful rest secure,

Sola fides sufficit.

  Whilst God can vouch and faith insure.

Tantum ergo sacramentum

  To this mysterious table now,

Veneremur cernui;

  Our knees, our hearts, and sense we bow:

Et antiquum documentum,

  Let ancient rites resign their place

Novo cedat ritui,

  To nobler elements of grace:

Præstet fides supplementum

  And faith for all defects supply,

Sensuum defectui.

  Whilst sense is lost in mystery.


Genitori, Genitoque,

  To God the Father, born of none,

Laus et jubilatio,

  To Christ his co-eternal Son,

Salus, honor, virtus, quoque,

  And Holy Ghost, whose equal rays,

Sit et benedictio:

  From both proceed, be equal praise:

Procedenti ab utroque,

  One honour, jubilee, and fame,

Compar sit laudatio. Amen.

  For ever bless his glorious name. Amen.


V. Panem de cœlo præstitisti eis. _Alleluia_.

    V. Thou hast given them bread from heaven. _Alleluia_.

R. Omne delectamentum in se habentum. _Alleluia_.

    R. Abounding with whatever is delicious. _Alleluia_.


  [Transcriber's note: This is a better translation (with music)
  from St. Gregory's Hymnal.
   https://www.gutenberg.org/files/23673/23673-h/English.html#No._52]

  1.
  Sing, my tongue, the Saviour's glory,
  Of His Flesh the myst'ry sing;
  Of the Blood all price exceeding
  Shed by our immortal King,
  Destined, for the world's redemption,
  From a noble womb to spring,

  2.
  Of a pure and spotless Virgin
  Born for us on earth below,
  He, as Man, with man conversing,
  Stayed, the seeds of truth to sow;
  Then He closed in solemn order
  Wonderously His Life of Woe.

  3.
  On the night of that Last Supper,
  Seated with His chosen band,
  He the Paschal victim eating,
  First fulfills the law's command;
  Then, as Food to His Apostles
  Gives Himself with His own Hand.

  4.
  Word made Flesh, the bread of nature
  By His word to Flesh He turns;
  Wine into His Blood He changes:
  What through sense no change discerns?
  Only be the heart in earnest,
  Faith her lesson quickly learns.

  Tantum ergo Sacramentum

  5.
  Down in adoration falling,
  Lo! The sacred Host we hail;
  Lo! O'er ancient forms departing,
  Newer rites of grace prevail;
  Faith for all defects supplying,
  Where the feeble senses fail.

  6.
  To the Everlasting Father,
  And the Son Who reigns on high,
  With the Holy Ghost proceeding
  Forth from Each eternally,
  Be salvation, honor, blessing,
  Might, and endless majesty. Amen.


{540}


                   The Prayer.


Deus, qui nobis sub Sacramento
mirabili passionis
tuæ memoriam reliquisti;
tribue, quæsumus, ita nos
corporis et sanguinis tui
sacra mysteria venerari, ut
redemptionis tuæ fructum
in nobis jugiter sentiamus.
Qui vivis, &c.

  O God, who in this wonderful
  sacrament hast left us
  a memorial of thy passion:
  grant us so to reverence the
  sacred mysteries of thy body
  and blood, that our souls
  may be always sensible of
  the fruit of thy redemption.
  Who livest, &c.


            Hymn _at the Elevation_.

O salutaris hostia,

  O saving host, that heaven's gate,

Quæ cœli pandis ostium;

  Laidst open at so dear a rate;

Bella premunt hostilia,

  Intestine wars invade our breast;

Da robur, fer auxilium.

  Be thou our strength, support, and rest.

Uni trinoque Domino,

  To God the Father, and the Son,

Sit sempiterna gloria:

  And Holy Spirit, three in one,

Qui vitam sine termino,

  Be endless praise: may He above.

Nobis donet in patria.

  With life eternal crown our love.


                     Finis.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE MANUAL OF CATHOLIC PIETY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


