The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Campaigns of the 124th Regiment, Ohio Volunteer Infantry, with Roster and Roll of Honor
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Campaigns of the 124th Regiment, Ohio Volunteer Infantry, with Roster and Roll of Honor

Author: G. W. Lewis

Release date: June 2, 2016 [eBook #52223]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, The Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CAMPAIGNS OF THE 124TH REGIMENT, OHIO VOLUNTEER INFANTRY, WITH ROSTER AND ROLL OF HONOR ***

[Illustration:

  _COLONEL OLIVER H. PAYNE._
]




                                  THE
                    Campaigns of the 124th Regiment
                        OHIO VOLUNTEER INFANTRY,
                                  WITH
                       ROSTER AND ROLL OF HONOR.


                                   BY
                              G. W. LEWIS,
                               MEDINA, O.

                                *  *  *

                            MANUFACTURED BY
                          THE WERNER COMPANY,
                               AKRON, O.

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  _LIEUTENANT COLONEL JAMES PICKANDS._
]




                              DEDICATION.


_TO all the noble men of the One Hundred and Twenty-Fourth Regiment,
Ohio Volunteer Infantry, living, and to the memory of those dead, who
counted as nothing all of sorrows, dangers, marches, battles, wounds and
death, that our common country might not perish, and that liberty might
be proclaimed to all the inhabitants thereof, this unworthy record of
their glorious deeds is dedicated by the_

                                                               _AUTHOR_.

[Illustration:

  _MAJOR JAMES B. HAMPSON._
]




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

 INTRODUCTION,                                                         7

 FROM CLEVELAND, OHIO, TO MANCHESTER, TENN.,                          11

 SOME RECOLLECTIONS OF THE CAMPAIGN OF CHATTANOOGA, AND THE BATTLE    35
   OF CHICKAMAUGA,

 THE SIEGE OF CHATTANOOGA, THE BATTLE OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN, AND THE    77
   STORMING OF MISSIONARY RIDGE,

 THE EAST TENNESSEE CAMPAIGN, AND THE MARCH FROM CHATTANOOGA TO      107
   KNOXVILLE,

 THE ATLANTA CAMPAIGN,                                               133

 FROM ATLANTA TO NASHVILLE,                                          179


                                 ROSTER.

 FIELD AND STAFF,                                                    217

 COMPANY A,                                                          219

 COMPANY B,                                                          225

 COMPANY C,                                                          230

 COMPANY D,                                                          237


 COMPANY E,                                                          244

 COMPANY F,                                                          249

 COMPANY G,                                                          254

 COMPANY H,                                                          258

 COMPANY I,                                                          264

 COMPANY K,                                                          269

 UNASSIGNED RECRUITS,                                                273

 ROLL OF HONOR,                                                      275

[Illustration:

  _SURGEON JAMES W. SMITH._
]




                             INTRODUCTION.


The campaigns of the One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Regiment, Ohio
Volunteer Infantry, if written at all, should have been written nearer
the close of the war, while the stirring scenes and events of those
years of daring, duty and glory were vivid in the mind of the writer.
The "Campaigns" should have been written by one that had intended to
write them from the first, and had made such due and proper preparation
during the time the same were going forward as would enable him to
collect the necessary data for a correct and valuable history of the
men, the companies and the regiment as an entirety. The "Campaigns"
should have been written by one that had as full knowledge of the entire
regiment as the author of these imperfect sketches had of the company he
commanded during the service. Some of these campaigns were written for
the purpose of preserving the events therein narrated, and by
solicitation were delivered before the "permanent organization" of the
regiment at its annual reunions, held from time to time, in the vicinity
where the regiment was organized. Some, by mere chance, were published
in the soldier papers of the country, and copied into others; but not
until very recently did their author contemplate putting them into their
present form, and only after a very strong desire had been expressed by
the regiment, at one of its reunions, that some attempt should be made
to preserve the deeds of the heroic men, living and dead, that composed
one of the truest and best regiments that ever marched beneath the
colors of the republic, did the author determine to undertake the work
that is now consummated.

It is the opinion of the author, in putting this book into the hands of
those who did so much to make the history it seeks to perpetuate, that
the most striking thing about it is its imperfections, its inaccuracies.
And this, to a certain extent, needs be so, as the events it
commemorates were written, almost altogether, from memory, and that
after more than twenty-five years after the facts narrated took place;
and many a time, while recalling those marches, battles and sufferings
of those brave men that struggled "to keep the flag in the sky during
all those dark years," it occurred to the author—could he only have the
memory of each of the survivors of that grand body of men, how much more
complete, accurate and interesting his work would be to them for the
perusal of whom it is intended. And again, the experiences of a modest,
but quite busy, professional career, for many years, has taught the
author that the same event is never seen by all alike, never remembered
by all alike, and could not be written by all alike, though all were
equally desirous to tell nothing but the truth.

In these "Campaigns" there has been no desire to gloss over the mistakes
and imperfections of the actors of the greatest drama that was ever
enacted in the world's history; but in the criticism of them the author
has had continually in mind the fact that, generally, all was done with
the best endeavor, with a purpose and patriotism that has not a parallel
in history. And sometimes it seems to be better to note a few faults,
that the work may seem real, not fabulous; that we write of men, not of
angels.

It was the original purpose to present engravings from portraits of the
field and staff, the original captains of the companies and some others,
but too much time had run to carry out, entirely, this design. We could
not publish engravings of each member of the regiment, though we are
aware that nearly all are worthy of such honor, and we thought to be
content with publishing engravings of the representative men of the
regiment, but in this we have succeeded only in part.

The "Roster and Roll of Honor" attached to the "Campaigns" is the one
published by the direction and authority of the State of Ohio. It is far
from being perfect, but the best that could be furnished, under all the
circumstances, and is worth a great deal more to each member of the
regiment in the form presented herein, than it is as published by the
authority of the state.

And now we say, go, thou little imperfect production, into the hands and
homes of those with whom we served, suffered, and still love. If this
poor souvenir of so good a service, and so many and great sacrifices,
revives the memories and stirs those brave hearts to whose services no
pen and no tongue can do justice, our desires are accomplished.

                                                G. W. LEWIS,
                                          Major 124th Regiment, O. V. I.

 _Medina, O., February 17, 1894._

[Illustration:

  _SURGEON DEWITT C. PATTERSON._
]




                  The Campaigns of the 124th Regiment,

                        OHIO VOLUNTEER INFANTRY.




               FROM CLEVELAND, OHIO, TO MANCHESTER, TENN.


The One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Regiment, Ohio Volunteer Infantry, was
born of the great impulse of patriotism that swept over the country in
the latter part of the summer of 1862, occasioned by the necessity for
the "300,000 more" to put down the slaveholder's rebellion. The greater
part of the regiment volunteered without the aid of a recruiting
officer. Company A was raised in Cuyahoga county, and the patriotic and
earnest William Wilson, afterwards its captain, seconded by that most
enthusiastic of men, Cleveland Van Dorn, afterwards captain of Company
D, were the leading spirits around which the brave men, that afterwards
were mustered into the service of the United States as Co. A, 124th O.
V. I., gathered, and became in fact what they were by letter, the first
of the regiment. Company A was organized with the intention of becoming
a part of the 103d O. V. I., but on going into camp, Captain Wilson
found that regiment already full, and finally determined to join his
fortunes, and that of his noble men, with those of the 124th O. V. I.,
to which regiment Oliver H. Payne had been commissioned as lieutenant
colonel, and James Pickands, formerly of the 1st O. V. I., as major.

Company B was organized, almost exclusively, from the young men of the
western townships of Medina county. Spencer township furnished the
greater number, some forty enlisting from that township in one day,
August 12th. Litchfield township furnished a goodly number, while Homer,
Harrisville, Chatham, La Fayette helped to swell the ranks, while a few
came from Wayne, some from Lorain, and later the youngest member, John
M. Bowman, was consigned by his patriotic mother, residing in Cleveland,
to the care of Company B. This company, or rather body of men, was sent
into Camp Cleveland by order of the Military Committee of Medina county,
composed of Judge Samuel Humphreville, John B. Young, Esq., and Mr. John
Rounds. This body of men, by the intercessions of the committee with
Governor Todd, was suffered to elect its commissioned officers, and, as
the result, George W. Lewis was chosen captain, John Raidaie, first
lieutenant, and Charles M. Stedman, second lieutenant. When this company
came to be mustered into the service of the United States, it had so
many men that a number of them had to be mustered in other companies,
and were afterwards transferred back to the company in which they had
enlisted. This was also the experience of Company A.

Company C was mostly raised in Cuyahoga, and Robert Wallace, afterwards
its captain, and John O'Brien, afterwards its second lieutenant, seemed
to be the nucleus around which the good men of Company C appeared to
form. Many of them were from the "Emerald Isle," and proved their honor
and daring on many hard fought fields of the campaigns of the regiment
in after days.

Company E came in from Lorain county, and John W. Bullock was made its
captain. But time and space forbid a more extended notice of the
different parts of an organization that was first-class, singly, or as a
whole, more than to say that Company D was brought into camp by Captain
George W. Aumend, the company being raised mostly in Henry county.
Company F was raised from the northern part of the state, and was
commanded by Captain Horace E. Dakin. Company G had many men from
Cincinnati, but was, in fact, recruited from all parts of the state.
Captain William A. Powell was its first captain. Company H was
recruited, mostly, in Cleveland, and its first captain was that
accomplished officer, Eben S. Coe. Company I was largely from
Cincinnati, with the late lamented James H. Frost as its first captain,
while Company K seemed to be a sort of an overflow from almost anywhere.
Hiram H. Manning was its first captain, and he was not mustered as such
until November 10th, 1863. It seemed for a long time to be a sort of
"motherless colt" of the regiment, and fared accordingly, but it never
failed in action, if it did not always have the care a company should
have.

In Camp Cleveland we took our first lesson as soldiers. Here the
"Awkward Squad" might have been seen, at almost all hours of sunlight,
being drilled by one a very little less awkward than themselves. The
"halt," "right-dress," "forward," "steady there," "eyes right," "eyes
left," "right wheel," etc., etc., given in the tones of a Stentor, might
have been heard on the parade grounds of Camp Cleveland, in season and
out of season, during all the fall and early winter of 1862. We were not
well up in the manual of arms here, as I do not remember that we had
muskets for all the men in this camp.

Camp Cleveland, during the time our regiment was there, was a hard place
for the young volunteer. Calls were constantly being made by the
relatives of the volunteers, and visits were constantly being solicited
and made to the old homes, so that, in time, the best officer(?) was the
one that granted the greatest number of "leaves of absence." Under such
circumstances, anything like the discipline necessary to perfect the raw
but patriotic volunteer into the well drilled and efficient soldier was
out of the question, and many a line officer was relieved of a very
heavy burden when January 1st, 1863, came, and our regiment was
furnished transportation toward the seat of war. None of the living
members of the 124th will have forgotten the terrible snowstorm at
Elizabethtown, Ky.

About the first of February, 1863, it seems a large number of regiments
were assembled at and near Louisville, Ky., to be forwarded to augment
the Army of the Cumberland, under the then victorious, and very popular,
General Rosecrans. Our regiment was paid off before we started on that
ever memorable expedition "down the Ohio," and up the Cumberland river
to Nashville, Tenn. Those were the times that tried the souls of the
company commandant. We had never been mustered for pay, and without
anyone, at first, to instruct us, that which afterwards seemed very
simple, was then a mountain of responsibility and worry. The captain
that could not get his muster rolls so they would pass the inspection of
that prince among gentlemen, Paymaster Major John Coon, could not have
his company paid, and anxiety is never a very great auxiliary to the
completion of a new and hard task. But those of us that looked upon this
financial officer in a sense akin to dread, found him a genial
schoolmaster, and he not only instructed us in our duties, but followed
us down the river until the last company of our regiment had received
its pay. The larger share of this money was sent home to wives and
children, and friends (some to creditors) in our own Ohio.

I have often wondered why the government did not march this force, that
was assembled at Louisville, to Nashville. The distance was one hundred
and eighty miles, connected by one of the best macadamized roads in the
country; and could we have been permitted to make the march by easy
stages, we would have been half soldiers by the time we reached
Nashville, and in a condition of health and soldierly prosperity very
much to be desired. But the way we were sent by the old stern-wheelers,
it occupied eleven days to make the trip, with no fire to keep us
comfortable or for cooking our rations, while the nights were spent in
shivering on the cheerless decks of those old wheezy and stinking boats,
which to all appearances had not been cleaned since the carpenters laid
their keels. Many a man was lost to the service of his country from this
method of his transportation, and many a man dates the loss of his
health from those eleven days of suffering and exposure. But whoever
writes of wars must write of mistakes; but we will think that everything
was intended for our good, by those that had the good of the country in
their keeping. The night we approached Nashville, we heard heavy firing
up the river, and found the next morning on coming up to the site of
Fort Donelson, that a portion of Wheeler's command had made an attack
upon the small garrison, and had been repulsed with a very severe loss,
considering the number engaged.

We went ashore and saw the dead confederates lying all about a piece of
artillery, that it seems they had endeavored to take by charging the
same; but the gun manned by the brave Illinoisans that composed the
garrison, made fearful havoc in the ranks of Wheeler. The officer that
lead the charge, Col. Overton, lay dead near the piece, and we were told
he was the same man that owned the estate where we first made our camp
in Tennessee. The killed of the garrison had been gathered under a shed,
and were composed in what seemed to me to be a long row, and as I looked
upon their upturned faces, pallid in death, and ghastly with wounds, I
thought I had already seen enough of war. We returned to our boat, and
steamed slowly up to Nashville. Going from Donelson to Nashville we saw
the river gunboat, Concord. It was claimed that this boat had taken part
in the fight of the day before, and we looked upon it, not only with
curiosity, but with admiration, it being the first specimen of Uncle
Sam's navy that many of us had ever seen. On arriving at the levee at
Nashville, we disembarked, and forming the regiment in column of company
front, with our band playing, and colors flying, we marched through the
principal street of the city. But how different from Cleveland, O. Not a
friendly face greeted us. Hardly a citizen was to be seen on the
streets, and not a salute nor a shout welcomed us to this one of the
most treasonable cities of the confederacy. We now, for the first time,
realized that we were in the land of the rebellion. We moved that
evening out to Overton Heights on the Franklin pike, and went into camp
on the very spot where the same regiment, as veteran soldiers, on the
sixteenth day of December, 1864, scattered the last of Hood's infantry
on the memorable field of Nashville.

In a few days we marched to the village of Franklin, eighteen miles by
the pike from Nashville. This march was a very trying ordeal for us
green soldiers. The most of the men carried luggage enough to overload a
mule, and such knapsacks as the men staggered under in this little
march, would have been a matter of amusement later in the war.

On arriving at Franklin, we went into camp on the north side of the
Harpeth river, that forms the northern boundary of the village, and
commenced soldier life in earnest. This place was occupied as an outpost
of General Van Dorn's division of Bragg's army, but what few rebels were
on duty here did not seem to care to try titles with us. Here, our
major, James B. Hampson, came to us, and being a member of the old
Cleveland Grays, and also having seen service in one of the earlier
regiments of the Ohio troops, was a very valuable acquisition to us in
the way of an instructor. His soldierly bearing and pleasant manner won
all our hearts. He instructed us in the "manual of arms," taught us the
"load in nine times," while in regimental and brigade drill he was a
regular God-send to the ignorant officers of the line, that the most of
us were. Here we had to attend the "school for the officer" and recite
from Casey's Tactics to our young colonel, and many the hour we spent
with him, ere the, to us, at that time, mysterious positions in which a
regiment could be formed were thoroughly mastered. Some of our officers
could learn nothing from books; but for school-teachers, like Captain
Van Dorn, and preachers, like Captain Stratton, it was nothing but fun
to repair to the Colonel's quarters to recite to one that had an earnest
desire to make capable officers of us all. We were now in the presence
of the enemy, and Forrest's cavalry used often to lope up to our pickets
to see what we looked like; and it was no infrequent occurrence for the
dreaded "long-roll" to call us from our slumbers to stand at arms for an
hour on the regimental parade ground. I remember one morning that we
were thus called out, and Company C, under Lieutenant O'Brien, was a
little late in taking its place in the line. Soon we heard it coming on
the double quick, while the "rich Irish brogue" of the lieutenant in
getting his company into line attracted our attention more than any
advance of the enemy that we apprehended (for by this time we had
discovered that this standing at arms was a scheme of old granny Gilbert
to give our hospitals practice); finding his place in the line, in some
way, his last command was, "Sthand fast company _say_, and I'll lay me
bones wid ye."

In the school of the officer, I remember his attempt at recitation that
ran something like this: "The ordly sagint thin advances tin paces,
surrur! nah!—two paces—I don't know, surrur." The big-hearted Irishman,
that did the fine work on the Perry monument, cutting the guard chain of
his watch out of the solid marble, at last learned that he was not
intended for an officer, though brave and patriotic, tendered his
resignation, and that was the last we ever saw or heard of Lieutenant
John O'Brien.

But while instructions in the movements of the company and regiment were
necessary, and we all tried to profit by the same, facility in
recitation did not necessarily make the valuable officer. As an
instance, our Methodist minister, Captain Daniel Stratton, was
Wonderfully fluent at the recitations, and became quite well drilled,
but at our first great battle, Chickamauga, he deserted his company, as
we were coming into the action, _in the face of the enemy_, and was
saved from the fate of his conduct by the great heart of Colonel
Pickands. He said to the colonel, "when I thought of my wife and dear
children at home I could not advance a single step towards the front."
But he advanced pretty well towards the rear, for after two days of
dreadful fighting and the third day in offering battle to an enemy,
nominally victors, but thoroughly whipped (save the magazine writers),
we came to Chattanooga and found our preacher in very comfortable
quarters, with his resignation ready written out, which was accepted by
our regimental commandant. Could our Irish lieutenant have done worse?
The march, the campaign, the skirmish line, the picket duty, the battle,
after all, were the true tests of soldierly qualities. Many a man, many
an officer, arose in our estimation, after we saw him tried in the
ordeal of battle, for whom we entertained but very little respect
before.

At Franklin we had to do picket duty by company out south of the
village, our line running along near the residence of one of the high-
toned families of the town, by the name of Atkinson. At his residence
our reserve post was established, and we posted a guard to protect the
family, which consisted of the old gentleman, quite aged, his wife and a
beautiful daughter, bearing the common but genial name of Sally. There
were two sons, but both were serving in General Frank Cheatham's
division of the rebel army. Sally was quite an expert singer, and played
the piano reasonably well, and, to entertain us, she was kind enough to
sing some of the war songs of the confederacy. I remember pieces of
those songs to this day; one went like this:

      "Hurrah, hurrah, for southern rights hurrah,
      Hurrah for the bonny blue flag, that bears the single star."

And another:

              "No northern flag shall ever wave
              O'er southern soil and southern graves,
              Look away, look away, look away, Dixie land,
              In Dixie land we'll take our stand,
              And conquer peace for Dixie."

These rebel war songs and others might have been heard floating out on
the soft evening air, near the old locust grove, and no one of the brave
men that did duty there thought any the less of the pert and plucky
rebel girl. We laughed at her wit and the raillery that she heaped on
us, calling us invaders. But the colonel of the 125th was one day on
duty as officer of the day, and hearing of the rebel girl and her songs,
reported the matter to old granny Gilbert, who issued an order that had
the effect of an injunction, and we heard no more of the sweet voice of
Sally Atkinson while we did duty at Franklin. Colonel Opdyke was an
excellent officer in many respects, but a pronounced martinet, and had
not a particle of humor in his composition. There was a rumor in the
regiment that our Colonel Jim, as we sometimes called him, was a little
sweet on Sally, but I think there was nothing of it, and for the sad
fate of Sally and her two brothers, see the last campaign of this book.

We had not been long in Franklin before our experience in
transportation, heretofore referred to, began to have its deadly effect.
The typhoid fever and camp diarrhœa became alarmingly common. Our men
sickened and were sent to the general hospital at Nashville, where very
many died, and many were discharged, as unfit for further military duty.
Not any one of the hard fought battles of our campaigns so depleted our
ranks as our stay at Franklin. The water was of the limestone formation,
and did not seem to agree with those that were comparatively well, much
less those that were sick. I think that every old soldier will agree
with me that the march, while more fatiguing, is more healthful than the
camp.

While at Franklin we had the misfortune to be under the command of one
General Gilbert, a regular army officer. A man that the government had
educated at great expense at West Point, and had kept in service for
years after, and yet had no process of determining that he had no sense.

This man, that might possibly have commanded a company under a careful
colonel, was placed in command of all the forces around Franklin. I am
sorry to say it was under the command of this imbecile that we first met
the enemy. Colonel Coburn's brigade, which was composed of the 85th and
33d Ind. V. I., the 19th Mich. V. I., the 22d Wis. V. I., the 2d Mich.
Cav., a part of the 4th Ky., and a part of the 9th Pa. Cav., with a
light battery of six guns and a small train of wagons for forage, was
ordered in the direction of Columbia. Our regiment accompanied the
expedition as train guard. We moved a short distance the first day out
and went into camp, having seen a few rebel cavalry, and having received
the fire from a rebel gun or two that did no damage to us, save the
breaking a musket stock for one of our men. The next morning we moved
out of camp, and I remember watching the 19th Mich., it was such a
large, fine looking body of men, and moved down the pike toward Thompson
Station. Colonel Coburn soon developed the enemy in force, and so
reported to General Gilbert, who sent back an order for him to advance
and engage the enemy, intimating that the commander of the brigade was a
coward. Colonel Coburn then advanced and engaged the rebels, but his
little force was outflanked on either side by the superior numbers of
the enemy, and though fighting heroically, were soon surrounded and
captured, save the battery that ran over the rebel infantry, and a small
part of the 22d Wis., a part of one company, the cavalry force; and had
it not been for our good luck in being on duty with the wagons, we would
also have been taken. As it was, nothing saved us but the best of
running, and in a long race at that. We came into camp that night badly
used up, and very much disgusted with our old granny Gilbert, having
seen and run away from the battle of Thompson Station. The government
expended Colonel Coburn's brigade and the lives of many brave men to
learn, what every soldier about Franklin knew from the first, that
Gilbert was not fit to be in the command of anybody.

While at Franklin we built a very fine fort, situated northwesterly of
the village, and near our camp. The fort was built of earth, regularly
laid out with angles, and a deep moat surrounding the entire work. The
embrasures were well protected with gabions made of cane bound in
bundles, and in the center a fine magazine was constructed.

Heavy guns were brought from Nashville, and mounted _en barbette_. Why
the fort was built none could tell. The chances that it would ever be of
use to the cause of the Union were one thousand to one against the
proposition, but at the battle of Franklin, November 30, 1864, it paid
large interest on the investment. Those big smooth-bore guns shelled the
cotton field, south of the village, over which the rebels charged, in a
manner which was fearful to behold. We that had worked so many days on
that fort, felt that we were well repaid for our toil.

While the fort was building, it occurred to Colonel Payne that the
"contraband of war" might be useful in this work, so he ordered
Lieutenant Raidaie to take a detail of men, and go forth and bring in
such of the bondmen as he could find that were able to do the work
required. So the lieutenant sallied forth in the direction of Roper's
Knob, and he was rewarded by finding large numbers of the aforesaid
"contraband," as the slave owners of Kentucky had sent their slaves into
Tennessee, to keep them as far away as possible from the union lines.
These slaves we kept in camp until the fort was completed, and all that
desired were permitted to return to the places from whence they were
taken; but many of the younger ones stayed with us, and engaged
themselves as servants to the officers. But it was wonderful with what
alacrity these poor ignorant colored people performed the work required
of them. They seemed to realize that they were working for themselves.

March 9th, 1863, we left our camp at Franklin, General Gordon Granger in
command, and marched to within about a mile of Spring Hill, passed by
and over the battle field of March 5th, Thompson Station, but saw no
evidences of the late unequal, but sanguinary contest, save a few broken
guns and some dead horses. We went into bivouac at night, having no
tents with us. We marched thirteen miles. The next day it commenced
raining and we were all wet to the skin, but nothing daunted, we went at
work and fixed up shelter, and at about ten a. m. we had marching
orders. We marched about three miles, it raining all the time. Company B
received a detail to furnish twenty-five men for picket duty, which was
filled with healthy men, and quite a number of sick men in camp, and the
number ailing in the regiment was far from being inconsiderable. But we
found the next day that this movement toward Columbia did not mean
anything, and we were ordered back to Franklin, which was only a march
of seventeen miles, but we came into camp that night as stiff and sore
as foundered horses. We had no battle, we had lost no men, but take it
all in all, we were the better soldiers for the experience we had
gained.

We had now been in Franklin three months, and had put in the time in all
the ways in which a soldier's life is made up. Now, hardly a day went by
that the rebel cavalry did not appear at our picket line, and frequently
a lively skirmish would occur between our cavalry and a detachment of
that of our enemy. The losses of the rebels were always enormous(?)
while ours were entirely insignificant. The early part of April the
rebels made a raid on our rear, and destroyed a bridge on the railroad
about six miles north of Franklin, which caused us very much annoyance,
for at that period in our history, as soldiers, we thought we were badly
treated if we did not get our letters regularly from home.

June 2d, 1863, was our last at the camp at Franklin. Here, we had
learned very much of the duties of the soldier. We had not been slack in
our work, and had become quite proficient in the company, regimental,
and brigade evolutions. Here we had bidden good-bye to very many of our
men, and our companies were small compared to what they were when we
came to this camp; but our colonel consoled us by insisting that the
fighting number of one hundred men, for all causes, was about sixty, and
we found afterwards that the estimate of our young colonel was not far
from the mark. This day we struck our tents, and marched to Triune, a
distance of but thirteen miles, but the weather was so excessively hot
that our men suffered a great deal; but we had learned some wisdom from
our former experience, for our knapsacks were not nearly as large as
when we left Nashville. We remained in Triune until the twenty-first day
of June, during which time we were stirred up by skirmishes very
frequently, but the skirmishing was done mostly by the cavalry, on the
respective sides, and the usual large stories were told in camp of our
immense superiority over the enemy. While at Triune, one of our fellow
citizens from Ohio, C. L. Vallandigham, was sent through our lines "to
his friends in the south," as Mr. Lincoln humorously put it. We were
usually very glad to see anyone from home, but we were not at all proud
of this representative from Ohio.

We now saw what we regarded as indications of a general advance on the
position of the enemy, and it seemed to be our fate to be compelled to
march to the extreme left of the army to join the brigade to which we
had been assigned while at Triune. We were assigned to what was called
Hazen's brigade, composed of the 41st O. V. I., the 9th Ind. V. I., the
93d O. V. I., the 6th Ky. V. I., and our regiment, commanded by General
Wm. B. Hazen, the first colonel of the 41st, an officer in every way
qualified for the command assigned him. This day we marched over the
battle field of Stone river, through the dense cedars that figure so
conspicuously in the descriptions of that terrible engagement of the
closing year of 1862. We marched through the village of Murfreesborough,
and out one and one-half miles east of the town, and went into camp,
having come that day a distance of twenty-two miles, with less fatigue
and suffering than any we had formerly made. The next day we marched to
Readyville, a distance of twelve miles, and found our brigade. Here we
fixed up a nice camp, and were informed we would stay for some time.
This was as desolate a part of the south as it was ever our fortune to
tread over. It did not seem to be inhabited to any great extent, and was
as woodsy as Ohio seventy-five years ago. On the twenty-fourth of June
we broke up our camp and marched directly south through Bradyville, a
city consisting of three houses. We saw the burning of a great amount of
provisions before leaving Readyville that we concluded had to be
abandoned for lack of transportation. We marched this day about seven
miles in a very severe rainstorm. We were now informed that we were
after General Bragg, and we might expect a general engagement at any
time. The next day we marched not to exceed six or seven miles, and came
to a very long, steep hill that gave our artillery and train great
difficulty in the ascent. The roads we came over this day were the worst
we had so far encountered, but when we were on the top of this hill we
were on a broad shelf or table-land lying directly west of the
Cumberland mountains that seemed good for nothing, save to illustrate
the great variety of the works of Almighty God. The next day we stayed
in camp all day, waiting for our train to come up. It rained almost all
day long. The next day, June 27th, company B was detailed to help the
train along. They came to what is called the Long Branch of the Duck
river, and the men had to build a brush bridge across the stream, and
after getting mired in the quicksands time and time again, they finally
succeeded in getting the train over. This company did not get in to join
the regiment until the next morning, and then came wet, weary, and not
in their usual sweet temper.

The next day, Sunday, we marched but four miles and camped in a wood (I
do not remember of seeing any fields); but one thing justice requires to
be said for this table-land country, the water was simply exquisite. We
were now reported to be within forty-two miles of Manchester, and we
were informed that we were now making a grand flank movement that was to
cut off the retreat of Bragg, and by which we were to capture his entire
army, and, in fact, we were making this grand flank movement at the
rapid(?) rate of from seven to ten miles per day. On the twenty-ninth we
crossed the east branch of Duck river and did little but get our train
over this miry stream. This same weary marching continued until the
fourth day of July, and finds us on the Elk river, at Morris Ford,
awaiting the arrival of the pontoons. It had rained almost incessantly
for the last fourteen days, and very many of us had not had our clothing
dry in that time, but the weather was warm and none of us seemed to take
cold; I remember one day of this march that it was so very hot that the
men fell out in great numbers, and when we halted at night, no company
of the regiment could show more than one stack of muskets; but before
morning the good faithful boys came in, and the next day were ready to
resume their arduous duties. On July the 8th we arrived at Manchester,
and found that General Bragg had escaped us, and had crossed the
mountains into the valley of the Tennessee. We had not seen a rebel
since leaving Triune, and owing to the condition of the country and
roads, if we had seen one he must have been dead, for we did not move
fast enough to overtake a live one. No battle had been fought, though
one day we heard heavy firing in the direction of Tullahoma.

And so ended the summer for the 124th O. V. I., and also, in fact, for
the Army of the Cumberland. Although General Rosecrans had not succeeded
in bringing Bragg to an engagement, he had driven him from middle
Tennessee, the great rebel recruiting ground for men, animals, and
supplies, and while the victory was bloodless, it was in no small sense
important to the union cause. The unionists of east Tennessee saw in it
their coming deliverance, while the depressing effect of a retreat told
upon the confederate forces. Since leaving Franklin our regiment had
marched over one hundred and fifty miles, which, considering the weather
and the state of the roads, was an accomplishment that had a tendency to
increase our confidence, and prepare us for the more arduous duties that
fell to our lot after we crossed the great mountains and commenced
operations in the valley of the Tennessee—the key to the conquest of the
confederacy.

[Illustration:

  _QUARTERMASTER WILLIAM TREAT._
]




           SOME RECOLLECTIONS OF THE CAMPAIGN OF CHATTANOOGA
                     AND THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA.


If you ask, to-day,[1] the young man of twenty-five years, married and
his little ones growing up in health and peace about him, what he
recollects of the war for the suppression of the rebellion, his answer
must be "nothing." He will say, "I was not born until after the war had
been on one year. I remember nothing about the war, as you call it, for
the suppression of the rebellion."

Footnote 1:

  Written in 1887.

If you ask the man of thirty years, in full business life, a leader of
society, the same question, his answer will be undoubtedly, "I remember
but little about the war; I was but four years old when the war broke
out. I remember sometime during the war seeing the soldiers, in their
blue coats and bright buttons and arms, as they marched along to the
station _to go to the front_, as they said. I remember hearing the
_drumbeat_, I recollect feeling the _heart-throb_, as I saw the flag
which they bore aloft. I was but nine years old when the war ended. I
remember that when the boys came back, battered and scarred, in their
dirty and faded uniforms, their flag in tatters, their faces bronzed and
burned by the southern sun, that of them that met them at the station
many wept, because so many that went away with them _returned not_."

And so, to the majority of those to-night, the war is but a matter of
history and legend of story and of song.

The recollections of those years from 1861 to 1865 are, in many minds,
as indelible as though graven on brass, or chiseled in marble.

Those of you who have personal recollections, as well as those familiar
with the history of those times, will remember that the summer of 1863,
so far as the Army of the Cumberland was concerned, was spent (as was at
one time said of the Army of the Potomac) in "masterly inactivity;" and
although after the battle of Stone river the army occupied a line as far
south as Franklin and Murfreesboro, Tenn. And though the army, under the
now immortal Grant, had captured one entire rebel army, and had opened
the "Father of Waters," so long closed at Vicksburg; and though the
gallant Meade had met the invaders at Gettysburg and hurled him back, in
defeat and confusion, to his old lair beyond the Potomac, the Army of
the Cumberland, under General Rosecrans, as late as August had barely
gained the foothills of the Cumberland mountains.

The Cumberland mountains run in a direction south of west and north of
east, and for most of the way are composed of two considerable ridges,
some two thousand feet above the valley of the Tennessee. These ridges
are broken at Chattanooga by the Tennessee river, and so bold and abrupt
is Lookout mountain on the south side of the river, that one can almost
conclude that some great convulsion of nature had reft it asunder from
its corresponding ridge on the north side.

This chain of mountains, this deep and broad river, lay between our army
and that of the enemy when the march commenced southward in August,
1863.

The corps to which my regiment was attached, the 21st, under General
Crittenden, and the 14th Corps, under General George H. Thomas, crossed
the mountains above Chattanooga, while General McCook's Corps, and the
Reserve Corps under General Gordon Granger, crossed at and below
Chattanooga.

And while in the effort of crossing this great mountain range and river,
the right and left wings of the army must have been seventy-five miles
apart, and neither near enough to aid the other in case of an attack. I
am almost at a loss to know how the Army of the Cumberland was put south
of mountains and river; whether by the ability of Rosecrans, or the
stupidity of Bragg, the feat was accomplished.

And while there was many a mountain defile that would have answered for
a modern Thermopylæ, happily for us the _three hundred Spartans_ seemed
to be wanting.

The early part of August, 1863, found us encamped at Manchester, Tenn.,
at or near the head waters of the Duck river after the close of the
Tullahoma campaign, if it is proper to call that a campaign, that was
simply a retreat on the part of the confederates, and pursuit on the
part of the federal forces.

Manchester is situated on what is known as the table-lands of Tennessee,
and though high and supplied with the most delightful water, very many
of our men were sick by reason of the exposure on the campaign just
closed, and had to be sent back to hospitals or sent home on furlough,
which latter was very seldom done; and when accomplished costing great
pains and anxiety. If our national policy had been to furlough our
worthy sick, instead of sending them off to the inhospitable hospitals,
to be experimented upon by the graduates, fresh from our medical
colleges, to pine away with homesickness, be crowded together in great
numbers "into the wards of the whitewashed halls, where the dead and
dying lay," when a few days and weeks at home with its cheering
influences and home diet, _something mother could fix up_, would have
restored, without doubt, thousands of brave men to health and duty, that
by reason of the narrow, niggardly, treat-every-man-as-a-coward policy
of the government, went down to needless and untimely graves.

I have read accounts of the neatly arranged graves of these men with the
beautiful marble headstones, furnished at the expense of the government,
in our great national cemeteries; but I never think of those great
armies of the dead but I think, _how many might have been saved_. Very
many of those headstones are more monuments to the lack of good sense on
the part of the government, than a noble and patriotic generosity.
Nearly all of our soldiers that died of disease in hospitals, could and
should have been sent home and saved. I remember very well it was never
any trouble to procure a leave of absence for a sick or wounded officer,
but to procure one for a poor private in the ranks was altogether a
different matter.

It may not be out of place for me to give you a brief account of an
effort that I made to procure furloughs for three most worthy sick men,
while at Manchester, just before we started on the Chattanooga campaign.

These men were afflicted with that terrible disease, that with the aid
of the government and its surgeons has slain its tens of thousands,
known as camp or chronic diarrhœa. I made out an application for
furloughs for these men, knowing full well that the time was very brief,
that we must leave these brave men to the care of entire strangers—men
that did hospital duty, as they did any other, because they were ordered
to; and knowing full well that, in all human probability, they would
never return to the regiment if they were sent to the hospital, I
determined to make a great effort to save them. I procured a very
earnest indorsement from our regimental surgeon, Major Dewitt C.
Patterson, than whom a more competent or kinder hearted surgeon never
had the health of a regiment in charge, also the very favorable
indorsement of our colonel; but he refused to give me leave to carry the
application to brigade headquarters, for good reasons, no doubt, as he
informed me that the application must go through the regular channel. I
told him "the application might get back in time to attend the funeral,
but never to do these men any good." I immediately went to the
headquarters of the brigade commandant; he examined carefully the
application, wanted to know the urgency of the matter, and after I had
explained to him all I could, and after I had urged everything I could
think of that I thought would help the case of the sick men, he coolly
took the application from my hands, indorsed it "disallowed," and
ordered me to my regiment, saying, "we are not granting furloughs on the
eve of starting on a campaign."

I was somewhat disheartened, but not altogether discouraged. I
immediately repaired to General Palmer's headquarters, who commanded the
division. The general treated me with great politeness, heard all I had
to say, and then informed me that no furloughs were being granted; said
"he would excuse me for bringing up the application without leave,"
kindly ordered me to my regiment, and advised me "give up the
enterprise, if I wished to save myself from the disgrace of a court-
martial," which, as we soldiers all know, is a _court organized to
convict_.

I then turned my steps toward the headquarters of General Crittenden,
commanding our corps; he treated me with great brusqueness, not only
refusing the indorsement I so much desired, but severely censured me for
not sending the application through the regular channel. He gave me the
usual complimental (?) order, "Immediately repair to your regiment,
sir!" I was "cast down, but not destroyed;" I had just one ground of
hope left me, and that was centered in "Old Pap Thomas."

These various headquarters that I had visited were all situated at or
near Manchester, and I applied to them all the same day; but the
headquarters of General Thomas was at Winchester, more than sixty miles
from our camp. The point now was how to get to Winchester? I went to the
colonel and applied for a pass for that place, which, luckily for my
purpose, he granted me without asking me what I wanted it for. We had a
train down in the morning and back at night; so the next morning, armed
with my pass and my badly _disallowed_ application in my pocket, I took
the train for Winchester. With my heart away up in my thorax, I
approached the headquarters of the old general. I was compelled to wait
a long time, it seemed to me, to obtain an interview with him; he
received me very gravely, yet kindly, and carefully listened to all I
had to say; he wanted to know "if the men would be able to go home if
the furlough should be granted?" I insisted they would if granted
immediately, and that must be my excuse for not sending the application
through the regular channel. I urged upon the general the fact that so
many of our men were dying in the hospitals of that terrible disease.
The old iron-faced general turned to a member of his staff that was at a
table writing and told him to indorse the application _allowed_. I then
asked the general if he would indorse on the same, leave for me to take
it in person to General Rosecrans. This he most cheerfully did, and
General Rosecrans issued the furloughs without another word of
explanation.

[Illustration:

  _ADJUTANT SHERBURN B. EATON._
]

The next morning the sick boys were taken to the train, and started for
Ohio. In sixty days two of them returned for duty, were in every battle
of the regiment, and were honorably discharged. The other was discharged
for disability. One of them, after the war, made himself a home in
California, the other I meet often, but I never see him but I think how
much he owes to that noble "Old Pap Thomas."

In a few days after we were ordered to get ready to march, and the first
day brought us to a beautiful mountain river, on the banks of which we
went into camp, near a small quaker village called Irvingville, I think.
The next morning we had to ford the river, which was cold and in some
places quite deep. This brought us to the first range of the Cumberland
mountains. Our regiment was detailed to assist the wagon train up the
steep mountain road, which duty occupied our attention the greater part
of the day. That night we encamped on the mountain, and enjoyed a most
refreshing sleep in the cool invigorating mountain air. The next day we
marched down off from this ridge into the Sequatchie valley. This valley
is some mile or more, perhaps, in width and runs down to Chattanooga,
and we entered it some six or eight miles from its head. Through this
valley runs a pure cold stream of water—a thing always prized by an army
or camping party.

We also found here plenty of corn—just at the roasting-ear period of
maturity; and it would surprise you farmers to see how soon a ten-acre
field of green corn would be used up by an army. But how did the boys
prepare it so as to make it good and wholesome? Of course, it could be
roasted on the ear, but that was too slow a process. By this time, in
our experience as soldiers, we had divided into messes of about four.
One would carry a small tin pail or kettle, holding about four quarts;
another would carry a small frying pan; the third would carry a
coffeepot (without which the rebellion could not have been put down);
while the fourth would carry some other article necessary to the
culinary art. The commissary supplied us with salt pork or bacon, and
also with salt and pepper. Now the culinary process is this: the corn is
gathered and carefully silked, then with a sharp knife (and every
soldier was supposed to have one—or if left lying about loose) the corn
was shaven from the cob, put into the frying pan with a slice of pork or
bacon, and cooked until tender; add salt and pepper to suit taste, and
you have a dish good enough to set before a union soldier—and too good
for a king.

We remained in this beautiful valley until the corn was all used up; and
one would be surprised to see how it helped out our rations. One other
notable thing about this green-corn diet—some of our men that were sick,
but dreaded to be sent back to hospital and had kept along with us as
best they could, were entirely cured by this change of diet. It was the
vegetable food that did the good work for them. I have known green
apples, that are always supposed to be harmful to a well person, help a
sick soldier.

One could not help thinking, what was to become of these poor people of
this valley, whose only means of support we had eaten up and destroyed;
but war is merciless, "war is hell," as General Sherman said.

When we broke up our camp we pushed straight for Waldron's ridge lying
directly in front of us. We found the ascent of this ridge much more
difficult than that of the other had been, but finally we reached the
top of the mountain. It was very singular to find here a country with
all the characteristics of level or table-land—lying more than two
thousand feet above the country we had left behind us, or the valley of
the river beyond. The next day we resumed the march, and in the
afternoon began the descent into the valley of the Tennessee.

The road down the mountain was the worst, by far, that we had
encountered. In some places the road lay over ledges of rocks that were
four feet directly down; and many wagons were broken, as well as axles
of cannons and caissons. I suppose, to this day, there could be found
evidences of that fearful descent, in the wreck of government property
lying along that mountain road.

The valley of the Tennessee at last reached, we went into camp at Poe's
tavern, and remained there some three weeks, spending the most of our
time in foraging for our animals, as well as ourselves.

In this locality there is one of the greatest curiosities it was ever my
privilege to behold. It consists of a lake or pond on the top of the
ridge we last came down. Directly to the west of where we were encamped,
the ridge breaks off into palisades, some five hundred feet in height.
Hearing of this curious lake from some of the natives, a party of us set
out one day to explore it. We were compelled to go up the ridge by the
same road we had come down, which took us some distance to the northward
of the place where we had been informed the lake was located. At last
our efforts were rewarded by finding the place. The lake is almost a
circle of about six hundred feet in diameter; on one side the rocks had
fallen down on an angle of about forty-five degrees, making it possible
to descend into this terrible looking place. Once down to the water's
edge one could look up the perpendicular sides of this walled-in lake
for three hundred feet. It looks as though at some time the rocks had
sunken down into the great cave beneath, and left this basin which
filled with water from the springs of the mountains. One of the most
curious features of this curious basin is that the water has a rise and
fall of fifteen feet, at regular intervals. The water was as clear as
"mountain dew," and some of our party, on going in to swim, thought they
could dive out of sight; but no effort of a swimmer that could go down
eighteen feet, seemed to make any difference with his visibility. The
natives looked upon this place with great awe, and gave it the fearful
name of "Devil's Washbowl."

We had not been at this camp many days before the mystery of the rising
and falling of the water in the bowl was fully explained. About a half
mile below our camp was a large spring from which some of our brigade
got water; on going there for water one day a soldier found the spring
had failed, and so reported. In a few days thereafter another soldier
went for water, and found the spring flowing as bountifully as when
first discovered. An investigation showed that when the spring ceased to
flow, the water in the bowl began to rise, and when the water in the
spring began to run, the water in the bowl began to fall. And so it
turned out to be an intermitting spring, the philosophy of which every
schoolboy that hears me to-night is familiar; and the devil lost the
most of his reputation in that locality.

We made quite a long stop at this camp, but at last the order to march
came; we went directly down the west bank of the river for about twenty
miles, and went into camp for the night; the next morning we marched out
to the river, and were informed that we must ford the same.

The Tennessee, where we were required to ford it, was a little less than
a mile in width, and in some places quite swift. We were ordered to
remove our clothing, but the order was regarded more advisory than
imperative; and while some did their clothing up in neat bundles and
bore them on their bayonets, others kept theirs on and trusted to the
warmth of their bodies to dry them on the other side.

We started in four ranks, the usual marching order; we got on very well
until we came to the deep and rapid portion of the river, when some of
our short men became very apprehensive, and I remember we had to keep
hold of hands to prevent the current from carrying us down the stream;
while we had to take our shortest men on our shoulders to keep their
heads above water. It is a sight never to be forgotten to see a mile of
men in the water. After having gained the east bank in safety we spent
the time in watching the others come across, or in drying our water
soaked garments. It was amusing to see the little short fellows ford;
they would come along with great bravery until they came to the deep
water, when you could see them holding their heads away back; now and
then one would go all under, and you would see him climbing some fellow
that nature had provided with a longer pair of running-gears; but
finally all crossed in safety, and no sickness followed this enforced
baptism.

We went into camp that afternoon near the river; and the next morning
took up the march in the direction of Ringgold, Ga. Here we found, as a
rule, the people had abandoned their homes and gone south, leaving them
to be pillaged by thoughtless or criminally inclined soldiers. On this
day's march I saw an instance of the propensity of some men to steal
that was about as amusing as it was disgusting. As I was marching at the
head of my company I heard a great clattering, and on looking back I saw
a soldier coming with a great load on his back done up in a piece of
shelter tent, which on a nearer inspection proved to be a set of dishes;
there were tureens, bowls, plates, pitchers, platters, and in fact
everything known to a well regulated set of dishes. The fellow marched
on with great composure amid the derisive shouts of his comrades that he
passed; and probably that night ate his hard-tack off southern china.

That night we went into camp near a branch of the Chickamauga river, and
the next day marched into Ringgold. This village, named in honor of
Major Ringgold, that fell at the battle of Buena Vista, was a town of
about two thousand people at that time, I should think, when at home,
beautifully located at the foot of the White Oak mountains; but very few
of its people remained there, and the town was a very sorry looking
place, though built mostly of brick, and in much better taste than most
of the southern towns that we had seen.

[Illustration:

  _SERGEANT MAJOR JOHN S. NIMMONS._
]

Here I saw the first exhibition of the extreme spitefulness of the
southern woman. Our camp was close to quite a fine looking residence,
and seeing a collection of soldiers about there, I thought I would step
over and see what was going on. In the doorway stood a good looking,
decent appearing lady, and another was just inside of the door. The
first one spoke to the crowd of soldiers (that looked as though calico
was worth a dollar a yard), and said, "I suppose yuans all came down
here to rob weuns of our land." Some one denied the accusation, and,
with the most intense bitterness depicted in every feature, she added,
"Weuns are perfectly willin' to give yuans all land 'nough to bury yuans
on, and we reckon yuans will need consid'able befo yuans git out heyer."
I am sorry to say that some of the boys that laughed at the display of
provincialism and spite on the part of the rebel lady, were compelled to
take up with her offer a few days thereafter.

Here we found quite a lively skirmish going on between Wilder's mounted
infantry and some confederate cavalry, out toward Dalton.

We remained here a few days and then moved over to the locality of Lee &
Gordon's mills, and the eighteenth day of September found us encamped on
the Chickamauga river, some sixteen miles south of Chattanooga.

The Chickamauga is a small river that puts into the Tennessee a few
miles above Chattanooga; at most places fordable in low water, but at
some points, owing to the limestone formation, dropping into pools, deep
and cavernous. The Indians named the little stream Chickamauga, and as
they interpret, the word means "dead man's river;" if the name was
intended to be prophetic, how terribly was it fulfilled the nineteenth
and twentieth days of September, 1863.

All day the eighteenth the south bank of the stream was held by the
skirmish line of the enemy; and I remember it was quite a novel and
exciting scene to witness the belching of the smoke and flame from the
muskets of the skirmishers, while now and then the whizzing of the stray
bullet, admonished us that even off duty our position was not one of
absolute safety and repose. All that day "the grapevine telegraph" was
working in fine shape. The camp was alive with rumors that McCook's
Corps had not yet effected the crossing of the mountains; that Bragg had
been reinforced by Longstreet from the army of northern Virginia (this
was true), and it was the purpose of the confederate commander to
destroy the 14th and 21st Corps before a junction could be made with
McCook, and before the Reserve Corps under Granger could come within
reinforcing distance.

The sun had just hid his face behind the rocky sides of the Lookout when
the order was given to "strike tents," and each regiment was quietly but
speedily formed in marching order, and all that night long we marched to
the right, to be nearer McCook when the time should come when the foe,
long followed and hunted, should hunt us in return.

Any one who has not had the experience cannot have any notion of the
absolutely disgusting weariness of a night march in the presence of the
enemy. To march in column, day or night, is much more fatiguing than to
march singly; but on this terrible night, I remember, the dust was shoe
mouth deep, and it came up filling our nostrils with dirt and our souls
with indignation. Happy, then, was he that had some phrases, unknown to
the ordinary soldier, with which he could give vent to his disgust. If
it is true "that hope keeps the heart from breaking," I have often had
the reflection that "there are moments—this was one of them," when the
strong expressions used by the union soldier kept him from desertion.
Then the halting to let a battery of artillery pass or a train of
baggage wagons, while we were standing or being led into the darkness,
in a kind of military blind man's buff, without any of the merry
incidents of that childish game of the long ago.

At last the morning of the nineteenth of September, 1863, dawned on
thousands of that grand old army for the last time. Inexperienced as we
of the 124th O. V. I. were at this time, we knew that we should soon be
struggling in the shock and carnage of battle. That the time for our
first baptism of blood and fire was fast approaching. The blare of the
bugles on every hand told that the work of preparation for that struggle
that was to be one that was to save the army from annihilation, was soon
to begin.

We pulled out of the old road that leads from Lee & Gordon's mills on
the Chickamauga, to Chattanooga, and halted and made coffee and were
soon partaking of "the soldier's banquet," not a very elaborate bill of
fare, but relished by those tired and dusty soldiers, notwithstanding
the preparations for battle going on around us.

I remember a little colloquy that took place between our colonel and
General Palmer that morning, while we were breakfasting that illustrates
how lightly soldiers can talk about going into battle, no matter how
they may feel. Our colonel said, "general, there's going to be a dance
down there this morning, is there not?" "Yes," replied the general, "and
in less than an hour your regiment will get an invitation to attend it."

[Illustration:

  _COLOR-BEARER SERGEANT LLOYD A. MARSH._
]

The country where the battle was fought was largely woods, now and then
broken by what in southern parlance is called a "deadening," which
simply means that the timber has been killed by girdling, and the ground
subjected to the mode of cultivation of slave times in the South. Some
portions of the country are quite level, and then breaking into bluffs,
as one leaves the river and approaches the foothills of the mountains.
Fisher Ames said, "nobody sees a battle," and it is literally true.
While Ames had reference to the great battles of the East that were
invariably fought on open plains, how certain the statement is when
thick woods and hills intervene along the battle line, which in this
case, extended for more than seven miles from right to left.

Soon the bugle sounded the "assembly" and our brigade commanded by the
late lamented General H. B. Hazen, filed out into the Chattanooga road.
We had not moved more than half a mile to the left, and down the road,
when we came to an old partially cleared field and deadening, halted,
marched into this field and formed into "double column at half
distance," which every soldier knows is the last position before the
line of battle is formed. Soon one regiment after another took its place
in the line, and all was ready for the advance into the woods in our
front where we knew from the skirmishing that had been going on all the
morning, that the enemy's line of battle was extending itself, with the
evident intention of getting between our left and Chattanooga. As I have
before said, this battle was the first time our regiment had been under
fire, though the other regiments of which our brigade was composed had
done good service at Perryville and Stone river.

I suppose there are plenty of men, that can get ready, and go into a
battle without fear or wavering, but for my part, my recollection of
that momentous event, is somewhat like another's, who describes his
condition on a certain occasion as, "whether in the body, I cannot tell,
or whether out of the body, I cannot tell; God knoweth."

But the order to move forward came at last and we moved into the pine
and oak woods in our front. We had moved but a few yards into the woods,
when the enemy opened fire and two of my men were wounded at the first
discharge. I was then in command of company B 124th O. V. I., composed
of my schoolmates and scholars, the most of them farmers' sons that knew
the use of the rifle; and but very few but that had a larger share of
_courage_ than their commanding officer.

I was ordered to deploy my company, as skirmishers to cover the
regiment, and moved to the front. This movement was executed under fire
and not in very good style. The regimental bugle still sounded the
_forward_, until my skirmish line was within three hundred feet of the
confederate line of battle. My line now attracted the attention of the
enemy, and drew his fire exclusively. A six gun battery was run up to
the line, and in less time than I can now tell it, my farmer boys had
shot down every horse and not one of the gunners could approach a gun.

At this time I saw the first man of our regiment killed, Corporal
Atkins. He was a tall, finely formed man, a farmer and school-teacher by
occupation; an abolitionist, he hated slavery, and consequently the
slaveholders' rebellion; and many a time around the mirthful campfire
had he been the object of the friendly raillery of his comrades, by
reason of his fiery sentiments of hatred of that giant wrong; and
sometimes it was hinted in his hearing, "the best fighters are not as a
rule, the best talkers." I can see him now as he stands at my right
behind the sheltering trunk of a large pine loading and firing, in that
storm of bullets, as calmly as though not at death's carnival. I see the
blood flowing from his left shoulder, I say, "William, you are badly
wounded; go to the rear." Putting his hand up to his wounded shoulder,
and extending his left arm says, "see captain, I am not much hurt, I
want to give them another." He draws another cartridge from his box,
springs his rammer, runs the cartridge half down—a bullet from the enemy
pierces that brave heart, and I see him fall on his face—dead. So
perished one of those brave sons that fought _for a great principle_,
which was the soul of the union army. By the fortunes of the field, we
were compelled to leave him there "unknelled, uncoffined and unknown,"
buried, if at all, by the careless enemy. But if there is a future where
the deeds of the brave and true are rewarded, William Atkins will be one
of the brightest stars in the galaxy of immortal life. But I must hasten
with my story or I weary you, as that day wearied us.

The skirmish line alone of our regiment was engaged. The line of battle
could not fire for fear of injury to our line, while our line was so far
advanced that the enemy's fire enfiladed us; trees, the ordinary cover
of skirmishers, were no protection whatever. Our colonel ordered us to
lie down and our main line opened fire over us, and it was difficult to
tell from which we suffered most, the fire of the enemy, or the bad
marksmanship of the line in the rear. Finally, those of us that had not
been killed and wounded, fell back on the line of battle and fought with
that line, and thus the day wore away.

[Illustration:

  _CORPORAL WILLIAM ATKINS._

  _The first man of the 124th O. V. I. killed. "See Captain, I am not
  much hurt, I want to give them another." Page 58._
]

In the afternoon, sometime, the order was sent around to be saving of
our ammunition as no more could be had at present, and if the
confederates charged we must rely upon the bayonet.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, we heard the commands of officers
in our rear, and turning in that direction, we saw the blue of our lines
over the old field coming to our relief. It was General Johnson's
division of McCook's Corps. They are formed in column by regimental
front, at a distance of about two hundred yards between regiments. The
first regiment at double-quick rushes through and past our broken and
decimated ranks, not stopping until they come close to the confederate
line; then halting abruptly, deliver a well directed volley in the face
of the enemy, fall and reload, while the next regiment rushes over them
only to repeat what those had done who had gone before. It would be
almost idle to add that the confederates were compelled to fall back
though composed of the flower of the army of northern Virginia. No men
no matter how brave, could stand outside of works the deadly impetuosity
of such a charge.

I had seen many noble looking men before; I have seen many since, but
have never seen any such men in appearance, as composed that charging
column that relieved us that dismal afternoon at Chickamauga. Had every
division of the Army of the Cumberland been handled and fought as
General Johnson's division was that afternoon, the historian would write
Chickamauga a victory, instead of a defeat.

After this charge, in which General Johnson drove Longstreet's line back
to and across the river nearly a mile and a half from where we had
engaged him, we had time to look after our wounded men. I received
permission to go out to the place where we had fought on the skirmish
line. Seeing that all the wounded men were carefully removed to the
rear, I hastened back to join my company. If I was filled with terror on
going into the battle, I was doubly so now. To be lost from one's
command in time of action is hard to explain, and a situation for which,
among soldiers, there is ever exercised very little charity. I inquired
of some wounded men the direction my regiment had taken, and hurrying
on, fear lending wings to speed, I halted near a log cabin in a small
opening where a six gun battery stood, and to the guns of which the men
were attaching long ropes known as prolongs. I soon came upon my company
and regiment lying flat on the ground, and evidently waiting orders. I
took my position in the company, thankful that the regiment had not been
engaged in my absence. In our immediate front all was still. The ground
ascended in a gentle elevation, thickly covered with brush but here and
there a tree. All at once there arose one of those terrible yells that
only a mass of rebels could produce, and on looking to the front, I saw
coming down the hill a solid mass of confederate infantry; their stars
and bars flaunting gaily, as the color-bearers came dancing on. All at
once the right of our line began falling back without firing a shot,
until all had commenced retiring to the right of our company. I was
chagrined at what seemed an ignoble retreat, leaving the battery I had
passed to certain capture. The rebels had began firing, but seemed to
fire far above us, as the leaves and small branches of the trees fell
thickly about us. As they came nearer, their marksmanship seemed to
improve, and several of my men were wounded, among the number was
Lieutenant Charles M. Stedman, who, though badly wounded in the
shoulder, refused to leave the company until the battle was over. He
afterward laid his young life on the altar of his country at the battle
of New Hope Church, May 27th, 1864. He was one of the very few
_absolutely_ brave men, I ever knew. I turned to watch the advancing
rebel hosts and to see what would become of the battery when their six
guns opened one after another in rapid succession, and I saw lanes and
alleys open in the solid ranks of confederate gray. This was repeated as
rapidly as the guns could be worked and never an over-charged
thundercloud seemed to strike more rapidly, than that grand old United
States battery poured its double-shotted canisters at half distance into
the now panic-stricken and flying rebel horde.

A lone battery with no infantry support on its left, with the infantry
support on its right, for, to me, some unaccountable reason, retreating
without firing a shot, fighting and repelling an entire brigade of
confederate infantry. I never saw it repeated. I never heard of its
being repeated in all of my experience in the war, thereafter. I don't
know what battery it was, I never could find out with any certainty, but
better work was never done by any of those brave men that worship their
brazen guns more than did ever heathen devotee the molten image he calls
his God.

I saw Colonel Beebe of General Hazen's staff after this eventful day,
and he informed me that his duties called him over this portion of the
field, and it was with difficulty he rode his horse among the dead.

Not thicker do lie the ripened sheaves in the harvest field, where
nature has been most generous, than did the confederate dead on that
lone hillside.

That night we marched to a new position and went into bivouac in line of
battle. The night was cold and frosty, and as we were not permitted to
have much fire and had left our knapsacks behind, we suffered from the
cold; but "tired nature's sweet restorer" overcame all difficulties, and
we lay down and slept among the dead as sweetly as though we had been
bidden "good-night" in our own northern homes.

Thus ended the nineteenth day of September, 1863, and something of what
I recollect of the campaign of Chattanooga and the first day's battle of
Chickamauga.

Sunday morning, September 20th, dawned cold and cheerless on the waiting
armies. The line had been reformed in the following order:

The 14th Corps occupied the extreme left, then came our corps, the 21st,
with McCook on the right and the Reserve Corps not yet up. All felt that
this Sabbath day would decide the fate of the army, as well as determine
the result of the campaign, for good or ill, to the cause of the Union.
Early in the morning we were ordered to construct such works along our
line as the material at hand would admit of, for at that time in the war
we had not learned the value of the pick and shovel. It is wonderful
what men can do when in extremity, or when their own safety or that of
the cause for which they battle, requires the exercise of ingenuity or
industry. Soon old logs, fence rails and everything else that could stop
a bullet, were being brought to the line. And by eight o'clock a line of
works was constructed that, while not any defense against artillery,
furnished quite a sufficient protection against small arms. My company
was again ordered out as skirmishers into the woods in front of the
brigade. We had not been on the line more than an hour when the rebels
advanced their line of skirmishers, and the firing began.

My orders were to keep the line well out, and to retire only on the line
of battle when the enemy advanced in force. It was soon evident to all
that the rebels designed to force the fighting for we could see his
charging lines rapidly advancing. We then fell back to our line of log
and rail works, and in doing so had to run the gauntlet of the fire of
excitable men of our line that could not be controlled.

Once over the works, and in position in the line, we had not long to
wait for the onset. The eagerness of the enemy in following the
skirmishers soon brought them into rifle range. Our Colonel Payne had
been very severely wounded early the day before, and the command of the
regiment devolved upon Major James B. Hampson, who afterwards gave his
life to his country at Dallas, Ga. With the coolness and bearing of an
old veteran he ordered our regiment to hold its fire until the rebels
were within close range of our works, then, all at once, we arose and
poured a well-aimed volley into their ranks. The 41st O. V. I., directly
in our rear and forming a second line, then gave them a volley and their
charge was ended. Three times that morning the enemy charged our
position, only to be beaten back in disorder and confusion.

About this time occurred that terrible mistake in the battle that caused
the panic and rout of a portion of McCook's Corps, and which carried our
commanding general out of the fight and back to Chattanooga, leaving
General Thomas to fight the battle alone. It was here that General
Thomas received the title of the "Rock of Chickamauga;" and it was from
this field that General Rosecrans was retired—never to be heard from
again during the war.

About eleven o'clock a. m. the confederates commenced a most determined
onset on the 14th Corps at our left. It soon became evident that the
enemy was gaining ground, as the firing came nearer and nearer, and the
left kept falling back until the cannon shot from the enemy cut the
limbs from the trees above us, and we expected every moment to hear the
order "change front to rear." The corps to our left had fallen back to
nearly at right angles with our line, and we could plainly see the
wounded men being borne back or slowly straggling to the rear. There are
times in the life of almost anyone when the circumstances with which he
is surrounded are burned into his memory as though graven with a pen of
fire. So on this occasion, although the enemy had been badly beaten in
our front, we saw our line of battle momentarily crumbling away on our
left. Visions of Libby, Salisbury and Andersonville came before us, and
it did seem as though our fate was destruction or captivity. While
intensely watching the progress of the battle on our left, all at once
we saw the front of a column of men coming on the double-quick out of
the woods in our rear. They advance nearly up to our position, they
halt, and face to the left. We saw an officer on a white horse ride up
to a color bearer. He takes the standard out of his hand, and with the
grand old stars and stripes in one hand, his sword in the other, he
gallops to the front; the ranks of blue follow fast their intrepid
leader. Then was battle on in all the grandeur of its pomp and
circumstance. No one single musket could be heard, but as some vast
storm that comes sweeping on from the northwest with a roar that is
appallingly sublime, mingled the volleys of the contending hosts, while
the salvos of the artillery cause the earth to tremble as in the throes
of an earthquake. Our line swings back, like a gate on its hinges, to
its former position. But where is that glorious spirit that led that
gallant charge that has saved us from capture and our army from certain
defeat? An orderly is seen leading back the white horse "that carried
his master into the fray," but no rider is there. "Wounded, but not
mortally" is the word that is passed from lip to lip. And that brave
Polish officer, General Turchin, still lives to receive the thanks and
honors of his adopted countrymen. This was the same officer that
rebelled against the old world tyranny and, in 1848, with Sigel,
Willich, Schurz, Austerhause and many others, fought for liberty in the
fatherland until fighting was hopeless; and for the liberty they could
never win in their country came to ours; but, strange to say, not one of
them ever drew his sword in the cause of the slaveholder's rebellion.
Very many of them, as some one has truly said, "wrote their
naturalization papers in their blood."

About two o'clock p. m. our brigade was relieved from the line where we
had fought in the morning, and held in reserve, ready to be taken to any
point on the line where our services might be most needed. The enemy, by
the mistake that I have referred to before, had driven a portion of
McCook's Corps from the field and entirely out of the battle, and had
extended its left so far to the rear as to cut us off from a large
spring that had furnished us with water the day before. From the time of
this calamity in the morning we had no water, and the air was thick with
the sulphurous smoke that created an intense thirst. The men were
clamoring and insisting that someone should go for water. There was one
member of our company, George Benton, that by his kindness of heart, and
implicit and cheerful obedience to orders, had won the respect and
confidence of his officers and the hearts of his fellow soldiers. In
speech, modest and kindly, yet in the battle he had shown himself as
brave as the bravest. George came to me loaded down with canteens, and
asked permission to go to the rear and try to find water. I, with some
emphasis, refused. The men at that set up a clamor, and insisted that
they were suffering for want of water. I explained the hazardous nature
of the enterprise. I assured them from the firing that our right was
well turned, and that anyone going back, alone and unattended, was
liable to be killed, wounded, or _captured_, which all dreaded more than
death or wounds by reason of the inhuman treatment our soldiers received
while in rebel prisons. I said to George, "I am afraid you will never
come back." With a smile of determination lighting up that noble young
face, he replied, "I will come back, captain, or I will be a dead
Benton." I was not quite strong enough for the emergency. I made a
mistake. That mistake cost George Benton his life. He never returned.
Whether he fell by a stray bullet, in those deep woods and thickets, or
whether he was captured and murdered in prison, I know not. The records
of Salisbury and Andersonville were searched, after the war, but on none
could the name of George Benton be found. After we had fallen back on
Chattanooga letters came from his father and sisters, inquiring
concerning the fate of son and brother. No one can know with what
bitterness I reproached myself for allowing myself to be persuaded
against my better judgment; and learning by that sad lesson—no member of
company B was ever again reported "missing in action." I saw the father
and sisters when we came back from the war, and told them what I had
already written them before of the way George was lost; but "hope, like
an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast," would not suffer them to
give up their dear boy as lost. They hoped that some day, like a lost
mariner, he would come from perhaps captivity and sickness, to gladden
their hearts and relieve the suspense that was crushing their lives. But
twenty-seven autumns have returned since that brave boy was lost to
sight in the smoke that covered that dread field of Chickamauga, but no
tidings ever came of that one, who was gladly willing to risk his life
to alleviate the sufferings of his comrades, and was permitted to do so
by the weakness of his commanding officer.

At about four o'clock p. m. our attention was drawn to the heavy firing
on our extreme right, and we conjectured that our Reserve Corps was
being brought into action. It proved to be true. General Granger came up
and with his corps that had known but little, if anything, of the
disasters of the day, charged the enemy with the force and effect of
victors.

But it seemed it was not the purpose of General Thomas to contend for
the field of battle, and to General Granger's Corps was assigned the
duty of covering the retreat of the balance of the army.

It was Wellington (whom his comrades loved to call the "Iron Duke") that
said at the battle of Waterloo, "would that sundown or Blücher had
come." And never did sundown hang his somber curtain over a more
grateful body of men than those that remained of the Army of the
Cumberland. Just as the sun began to cast the long shadows to the
eastward our brigade was retired to the west for about half a mile,
still in order of battle; but any one could discern that a general
retreat was to be commenced as soon as the friendly darkness should
cover us from the view of the enemy. While in this position we heard
cheers from what seemed to be a great body of men, and the rumor was at
once out that General Burnside had reinforced us from Knoxville. We
answered the cheers as heartily as our tired bodies and depressed
spirits would permit, and the sky was ablaze with the rockets that shot
up from the direction from which we had heard the cheering. Mendenhall's
battery of Rodman guns was at that time just in our front. He ordered
his men to load with canister, and then I heard him remark "that is the
last round of ammunition this battery has."

Some one out toward the skirmish line heard the order "Ninth Louisiana,
forward, double-quick, march," and pretty effectually dispelled the
delusion that the cheering and rocket party were our friends under
General Burnside. It was now quite dark, and tired, depressed and
supperless, we commenced the march that meant that the battlefield, with
all its treasures of our dead heroes, was to be abandoned to the tender
mercies of an enemy that looked upon us as invaders and destroyers of
their rights and liberties. It was, indeed, a sad hour. Two days before
we had gone into this conflict with full ranks and high hopes of
victory. Now we were "silently stealing away" under cover of the
darkness, like dastardly assassins, when, in fact, we were there in the
holy cause of liberty for all men, and for the union of the states as
against rebellion and treason. We were leaving our beloved dead,
uncomposed, unburied, with nothing to mark the spot where they fell,
with no place of sepulture, with no requiem, save the soughing of the
south wind through the banners of the majestic pines, or the nightly
songs of the sweet voiced southern mocking bird.

             "We carved not a line, we raised not a stone,
             But we left them alone in their glory."

We drew away into the defiles of the hills, and the glad sound of the
splashing of the horses' hoofs in the little streams that trickled from
the hillsides, then the scraping of the tin cups could be heard (the
efforts of the boys to get a drink of the muddy hoof-trodden water); but
straining it through the teeth, no nectar quaffed by the fabled gods of
old ever tasted so refreshing as did that grand beverage of nature to
those battle-stained soldiers that night.

Of the route we marched that night I never had the least information;
but when the sun arose over the mountains of North Carolina, the twenty-
first day of September, it looked down upon the old army in order of
battle on the summit of Missionary Ridge. All day we kept this position,
but the confederates wanted no more fighting on this occasion, and, you
can believe me, _they had my entire sympathies_.

Some have said that both armies retreated from the field of battle, and
had our army stayed on the field the night of the twentieth, no
confederate army would have confronted it on the morning of the twenty-
first. But this story, though I am told it has gone into history, I
never believed to be true. In the first place, the confederate general,
Bragg, had, when the campaign commenced, an army nearly equal in numbers
to our own, with no rear to take care of and guard. Secondly, after he
crossed the mountains he was reinforced by General Longstreet's Corps
from the army of northern Virginia. And, thirdly, he had at his command
(but not called into the battle to any extent) a large force of Georgia
state militia.

Then again, the second day of the battle McCook's Corps was largely cut
to pieces and destroyed for fighting business. The 14th and 21st Corps
were badly cut up in the two days fighting, and at the close of the
second day almost destitute of ammunition. And finally, there was the
movement of men before sundown to inform that _we_ were abandoning the
field. So it never seemed credible that the confederates were retreating
the night of the twentieth as well as ourselves.

The night of the twenty-first we fell back and entrenched a position
just outside of the then small village of Chattanooga. The victorious
confederates occupied the whole extent of Missionary Ridge, and soon
appeared in force on the summit of Lookout.

So I have given you, in great weakness and imperfection, some of my
recollections of the memorable campaign of Chattanooga and the battle of
Chickamauga. I have read no book or history giving an account of the
campaign and battle. Being simply an officer in the line my chances for
observation were very limited, and very many of my conclusions are,
_without doubt, inaccurate_. The plans of a battle, always an
interesting feature of history, I have, as a matter of course, been
compelled to omit.

[Illustration:

  _PRIVATE GEORGE BENTON._

  "_I will come back or I will be a dead Benton._" _Page 69._
]

But if this unworthy effort has revived patriotic memories in the minds
of those of you who can remember the war, or revived the recollections
of my old comrades in arms, or given some faint idea to those that have
come after us of what was attempted and suffered by those that strove
"to keep our flag in the sky" in all those dark years, I have been amply
rewarded for the attempt.

Chickamauga was in one sense a battle lost; but by it we won the
campaign, and from the ground beyond the mountains and beyond the river
that we had crossed, the invincible Sherman led his victorious legions
into and through the very vitals of the confederacy.

It was one of those grand struggles between brave men that has marked
the progress of liberty and right in all ages; that has cemented us
firmly in the bonds of UNITY and FRATERNITY and made us in arms
invincible as against the world.[2]

Footnote 2:

  First delivered before the River Styx Literary Society, March 12th,
  1887.




            THE SIEGE OF CHATTANOOGA, THE BATTLE OF LOOKOUT
                     MOUNTAIN, AND THE STORMING OF
                           MISSIONARY RIDGE.


The battle of the nineteenth and twentieth of September, 1863, had
resulted in disaster instead of victory. The Army of the Cumberland had
been forced to retire, to abandon Missionary Ridge, and to fortify a
line running through the outskirts of the village of Chattanooga from
Cameron Hill, near the river below to the river above.

The victorious rebels came on and took possession of the entire length
of Missionary Ridge, fortifying the same with strong parapets of earth,
while one hundred pieces of artillery soon found position on the Ridge
from right to left.

General Bragg also took possession of Lookout mountain, and planted some
very heavy guns near the summit, just above the palisades. I never knew
why those guns did not render our position around Chattanooga entirely
untenable, unless it was the poor quality of the guns or lack of
ammunition. All the execution that I ever heard of those guns doing was
to kill a mule that would have died of starvation later on. Those
hundred-pounders that were planted on the summit of Lookout were, for
some reason, only fired a few times, and not for weeks prior to the time
the siege was raised.

Never in the history of the Army of the Cumberland had the spirit of its
officers and men been more depressed. The battle of Chickamauga had not
only been fought and lost, but we also lost what was more than losing a
battle. We had lost confidence in our commander.

And I think when the order came relieving General Rosecrans and placing
General Grant in command of the Army of the Cumberland, there were few
regrets expressed, even among those that had theretofore given General
Rosecrans the title of "Hero of Stone River." But, in my humble
judgment, one thing, and one thing only, saved the Army of the
Cumberland. If General Rosecrans had shown himself incompetent to
command the army at the battle of Chickamauga, the rebel general, Bragg,
was possessed of a stupidity that more than overbalanced the
incompetency of Rosecrans.

Just for one moment view our situation. Almost surrounded. No railroad
communications over which to supply rations or ammunition. No
transportation whatever, save one wagon road over Raccoon mountain, and
that so exposed in places to the rebel sharpshooters that the teamsters
(though in a sense noncombatants) were constantly exposed to the fire of
an enemy they could neither see nor reply to. Then the road itself was
simply horrible. When not bounding over ledges of rocks that nothing but
an army wagon could withstand, they mired in the quicksand holes with
which the way abounded, so that at times an empty wagon was more than a
load for a six mule team. Then, this only road was constantly exposed to
the raids of troops of the rebel mounted infantry. It was of this road a
story is told of a teamster that was stuck with a load of ammunition in
one of those miry places, and while he was waking the mountain echoes
with his black whip and profanity, was overtaken by an "army chaplain,"
just fresh from some theological seminary of the north, and had not made
the acquaintance of the army mule driver. Hearing the terrible profanity
of this Jehu stuck fast in the mud, thought this a fitting opportunity
to "sow the good seed," and riding up to the disgusted M. D. said, "My
friend, do you know that Christ died for sinners?" The M. D., with a
glance at the new and dazzling uniform of the chaplain, sang out, "Look
a yer stranger, do you think it's any time for conundrums when I'm stuck
fast in the mud and the rebels not a quarter of a mile in the rear?"
Whether the chaplain thought his "ground was stony," or that the rebels
were too near, he abandoned his theological lesson and left the M. D. to
his fate.

In this situation of transportation, with no country on which to forage
or draw any supplies whatever, with the Tennessee river behind us, with
the Cumberland mountains beyond the river, with more than two hundred
miles from the nearest reinforcements, what but the stupidity of Bragg
saved us from destruction while in that position.

But, instead of striking us while depressed by defeat, he suffered us to
select our position, and before ten days had elapsed our line was
bristling with forts of no mean dimensions and strength, putting our
capture beyond the possibility of being accomplished by assault.

The siege of Chattanooga proper began about the twenty-fifth of
September. It was not long after this before a flag of truce was sent to
General Bragg's headquarters on Missionary Ridge, asking the privilege
of going out to the Chickamauga battlefield to bury our dead. It had
been so slightly done that in some instances not enough dirt had been
thrown over the sleeping braves to cover their uniforms. This last sad
office was tenderly and carefully performed; and in all instances where
there was anything to identify the dead soldier, his name, company, and
regiment were marked on rude headboards that could be improvised on the
spot. But alas! the fact that we, as an army, could not collect our dead
after the battle, caused thousands to sleep in nameless graves.

After the war this army of known and unknown dead was carefully removed
to the National Cemetery at Orchard Knob, near the base of the ridge,
and buried; all the _known_ neatly marked; but how frequently the word
_unknown_ occurs in that beautiful home of the dead soldier.

One good result, besides the decent interment of our dead, was the fact
that all of our wounded that were not able to be removed to southern
prisons were paroled and sent into Chattanooga. One of our men, Arthur
Budlong, had lain upon the battlefield until our boys found him and
brought him in under the flag of truce. Thus were the severities of war
somewhat modified by the humanity of man that not even the unseemly war-
cloud could altogether overshadow.

The monotony and dreariness of a siege can be appreciated only by those
that have taken part therein. Language fails me to give you anything
like an adequate idea of its listless torments. While on the march the
scenery is constantly changing. The exercise of marching keeps one
healthy, and keeps one's mind employed and the banishment from home and
loved ones does not occupy so much of one's thoughts. The skirmishing
and fighting, while dreadful in consequences and results, has on the
soldier, to a certain extent, an exhilarating effect; and the hours
spent thereafter, in the tales of personal adventure and experience,
while causing one sometimes to think that the tribe of "Ananias" was not
extinct, yet these tales of personal valor and daring helped to cheer
and while away many an idle hour; and, as a rule, no one was deceived
"by the tales they told us there." But in the siege every day was like
all the others; and from the time we fell back on Chattanooga until
operations began about the twentieth of November, the sky was cloudless.
And while the long Indian summer period of southern Tennessee, so
delightful to the citizen in time of peace, to us soldiers (to a certain
extent in captivity) it seemed to breed melancholy and homesickness. We
did all we could to avert this trouble. We played seven-up until we
almost wore the spots off the cards. We smoked and "jawed." We
criticised the plans of campaigns and battles. We decided the merits of
brigadier and major generals until, could you have heard us, you would
have thought we were writers formulating articles for the Century
Magazine instead of besieged soldiers trying to drive away enui. Oh, if
baseball had been invented then what regimental, brigade and division
clubs we could have organized, with hospitals handy to care for the
wounded. If we had only known the silly but fascinating game of lawn
tennis our sick list would have been shortened.

But these were not all of our troubles. Our commissary department began
to get hard up and threatened suspension. Now, for the purpose of being
understood by the Sons of Veterans and the young people that hear me,
suffer me to explain. A _ration_ is an allowance, issued by the
commissary department, of the various things on which soldiers are fed,
to-wit: hard bread (called hard-tack), bacon (sometimes called sow-
belly), fresh beef, beans, rice, coffee, sugar, salt and pepper, and
sometimes, under favorable circumstances, soft bread. Now a full ration
is ample for three meals, and sometimes a little to spare when _full_.
We had not been in a state of siege long (owing to the defective
transportation of which I have spoken) before we were put on half
rations, that is, one-half of three meals or one and one-half meals a
day; and before many days after we were put on quarter rations, that is,
three-fourths of one meal a day. Now any of you that have tried to live
on less than enough for one meal a day (and are no relation to Dr.
Tanner) will realize the situation we were in. While our rations were
short and, in fact, fast growing less, the health of the men was
materially impaired. The truth is, as a rule, while in camp soldiers eat
too much, and exercise too little. The quarter rations were helped out
by stealing corn from the famishing mules, which the soldiers parched
and ate. The mules and horses that were not sent to the rear died of
starvation, so that, at the time the operations began against the
position of the enemy, we had not a horse to move a gun. Could we have
moved our light batteries on to the Ridge, immediately after the
assault, the loss to the enemy would have been much more severe. But
while the starvation, the enforced fast that we suffered, may have been
beneficial to the health of the men, their morals seemed to decrease in
a corresponding ratio. Stealing whatever one could get his hands on to
eat became not only prevalent, but popular. The brigade commissaries had
to be guarded to keep them from being plundered, while not infrequently
the guards proved to be simply cappers for the hungry thieves of the
regiments from which they were respectively detailed. Officer's mess-
chests were raided; and one could not get up in the night without seeing
some adventurous fellow slipping through the rows of tents with a box of
hard-tack on his shoulders. Holes were excavated under the floors of the
tents, and used as storing places for the plunder obtained by these
nocturnal adventures. I now distinctly remember one "Israelite, in whom
there was no guile," of company I, that the boys for short called "Jew
Jake," that more than kept his mess in hard bread during that time of
scarcity. But the sad part of the whole business was that, while the
raiders and plunderers had all and more than they needed in the way of
bread, the honest ones had comparatively less, as the commissary
department distributed with absolute fairness the scanty rations it had
to issue. And for once there was no favoritism shown to the officers. An
officer could not buy more than was issued for a ration to a private
soldier. But I am, as I remember it from this great lapse of time, in no
situation to be very hard upon those volunteer commissary sergeants that
were so willing to help issue rations, even if they had to go on night
duty, for, as I now remember it, Jew Jake was a great friend to the mess
of which I was a member. And when the time was that the new white hard-
tack looked brighter and better than silver dollars to a people's party
man, no questions were asked as to how they were issued.

But the day of our deliverance was fast approaching. Above the village
and on the river, inside of our lines, was an old steam sawmill that
probably had not turned a wheel since the war began. This was discovered
by some one, put in order by some soldier (for we had plenty of soldiers
in our ranks that could repair and put in running order, anything from a
watch to a locomotive), and, on taking a stroll in that direction one
day, I saw a gang of soldiers sawing two-inch planks. These planks were
slipped into the river, and landed further down town for further use in
the great drama that we were preparing to enact. We had not been penned
up long in Chattanooga before the country became aroused at the danger
to the Army of the Cumberland. Luckily for us almost everyone saw our
danger save General Bragg, and he seemed to have no hostile designs on
our army. Truly, it seems to me, General Bragg was the General McClellan
of the confederate army, without McClellan's powers of organization and
his delight in grand reviews.

As I have stated before, the authorities superseded General Rosecrans,
and put the Army of the Cumberland, and all other forces to be
assembled, in command of the "Hero of Vicksburg," "the silent conqueror
of rebel armies and strongholds." But that was not all; the government,
by the aid of the matchless executive ability of Edwin M. Stanton,
President Lincoln's war secretary, withdrew the 20th Corps, commanded by
General Joe Hooker, from the Army of the Potomac, transferred them by
rail and put them into camp at Bridgeport, on the Tennessee river about
fifty miles below Chattanooga, in seven days' time. This was the most
rapid movement of troops ever known in the world's history. In the
meantime General Sherman with his western veterans was on the long march
from the Mississippi, headed for Chattanooga. I remember one night the
rumor came by "the grapevine telegraph," "Hooker was at Bridgeport,
Ala.," and soon the shout "Hooker has come—Hooker has come—Hooker's at
Bridgeport" ran along our lines. Even the never ending seven-up was
abandoned, and the men gathered in squads to inquire and discuss our
prospectively bettered condition and situation, while the officers
hastened to headquarters, anxious to have the rumor confirmed. It was
not long before an officer from the 20th Corps was seen in Chattanooga,
and then the enthusiasm of the Army of the Cumberland knew no bounds.
But Lookout valley was in the possession of the enemy, and it was the
purpose of General Grant to lodge General Hooker's Corps in that valley,
preparatory to swinging it around the north side of Lookout mountain.

Day after day the sound of the ax and the hammer might have been heard
at the steamboat landing in front of the village. It was the building of
boats from the material sawed at the mill above. The boats were
constructed on the pontoon pattern, not deep, but wide, and if the
rebels took notice of the work they would have been justified in
believing from appearances, that our intention was to construct a
pontoon bridge across the river from Chattanooga. But that was not the
intention. One day there came an order from General Hazen, who commanded
our brigade, to furnish so many men, picked men, on account of their
known bravery and soldierly character. Also, a certain number of
officers to be selected for the same qualities. We furnished the
requisite number from company B, and so did each company of the
regiment, but the name of your unworthy speaker was not on the list of
officers. He was not either among those _called_ or _chosen_. Of course,
I did not know that our gallant Colonel Pickands considered me worthy
for the expedition at hand; but I did know that my saber had been
hanging idly in his tent "for low, these many days," and being there
duty was not for me until I was again put in possession of the same. So
I stayed in camp with Captain Powell of company G and some other
officers and men; because, while all were brave enough, all could not be
chosen. I think the number selected from our brigade was three hundred,
commanded by that prince among fine officers, the late lamented General
Hazen.

That night the detail were all gotten ready and down to the landing; and
at midnight, when the young moon had hidden its bright crescent behind
the Cumberlands, and the fog from the river had wrapped the base of old
Lookout in an impenetrable cloud of mist, the "three hundred" embarked
silently, and the current of the river bore them down to the point where
the work was to be done. They swept along without accident; and not even
the sleepless rebel pickets, that lined the left bank of the river,
discovered their presence. Just before the sun began to chase away the
darkness from the east they halted at Brown's Ferry, the place of their
destination. Their boats were hastily shoved ashore and the skirmish
line formed, and before the rebels in Lookout valley knew what was going
forward, the "three hundred" of our brigade awoke them from their dreams
by the crack of their muskets, as they scattered the rebel picket line
posted along the river, and before the sun was up Hooker's legions were
pouring into the valley and on their way to the north base of Lookout,
and by the time the sun had set that day Hooker's skirmish line was in
sight of Chattanooga.

This signal success at Brown's Ferry, more remarkable for the boldness
of its plan and the daring with which it was executed than anything
else, did not cost our brigade the loss of a man, either killed or
wounded, but it gave Hooker a foothold in Lookout valley whereby he
swept it of rebels and opened up _our cracker line_, as the boys called
it, and in a few days we had full supply. From the date of the
expedition to Brown's Ferry whatever there was of the siege of
Chattanooga was raised.


                    THE BATTLE OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN.

Not many days after the capture of Lookout valley by Hooker the head
column of General Sherman's troops came up on the west side of the river
and commenced laying a pontoon bridge across, and soon the western boys,
all dusty and begrimed by their long march, came filing through our
camps. To say they received a hearty welcome from the Army of the
Cumberland is drawing it mildly. They were no _paper collar soldiers_.
They not only had the bearing of veterans, but victors. They marched out
east of town and went into camp near Tunnel hill. Even soldiers often
have but little idea of the time it takes to move a great army of men
from one position to another. It consumed an entire day for General
Sherman's army to pass out to their camp.

The twenty-third day of November, 1863, the Army of the Cumberland moved
out late in the afternoon, none of us knowing the purpose. We formed in
a continuous line of battle with a heavy skirmish line well in the
front. At the word of command we all moved in the direction of the
ridge.

Before the rebels seemed to be aware of what was intended we had come up
to our picket line, and that also advanced with our skirmishers, when
the rebel outposts in most places gave way without showing much
resistance. But where the rebel line crossed Orchard Knob they had quite
respectable rifle pits which they defended with some spirit, causing the
41st O. V. I. some trouble in dislodging them, and thereby we had some
few men wounded in our brigade. This line, formerly occupied by the
rebel outposts, we at once commenced fortifying by throwing up strong
rifle pits of earth and stone. We then advanced our skirmish line well
out toward the base of the ridge. One of the prisoners that we captured
said: "Weuns thought youns was coming out for a review, we didn't think
youns was coming out to fight weuns." We informed the Johnny that
General Grant was commanding us, and he was not a review general. That
night we bivouacked on the line, working on the rifle pits by details.
It might be well enough to here remark that the saber of the subscriber,
that had so long hung in the tent of Colonel Pickands, was shortly
before this forward movement returned, owing to the fact that the little
unpleasantness that had occurred with General Willich had fallen into
the condition of "inoxous disuetude," and your humble servant was
permitted to carry that then and now totally useless appendage of an
officer until the muster-out man relieved him therefrom.

For fear some of you may think my offense was more serious than it was,
and that all may know just how severe army discipline was in those times
when men for the good of their country submitted to the petty tyranny
and whims of their superiors, I have concluded to relate the experience
I had of being under arrest. It was one of those beautiful Indian summer
days when, under conditions of peace, bare existence is a luxury, I had
command of the reserve post in front of Fort Wood. To relieve the tedium
of the hour, myself and three non-commissioned officers on duty with me
were engaged in the _army orthodox_ game of "seven-up." On looking to
the eastward I saw a general officer and his staff approaching as they
came over the top of a hill. I immediately turned out the reserve, and
when the cavalcade rode up I gave the order "present arms," which was
obeyed in good style, but instead of General Willich and his staff
riding away with a kind good morning, he said, "Captain, you report mit
your Colonel under arrest," and without telling me what the "head and
front of my offending" consisted of, I started back to the headquarters
of my regiment. I deposited my _cheese knife_ with the Colonel, and he
directed me to report to the brigade commander, and he directed me to
report to General Willich, whom I found in an old log house. I made
known to him my business. After producing a snuffbox as large as an army
frying pan, and after filling very well his nasal appendage, commenced
in about this style: "Cap'n, you blay cards mit your men. _I blay
cards._ I blay cards mit officers, but not mit men. You blay cards mit
your men—mit your enlisted men. Your men not have respect mit you. Then
when you come mit the battle, you lose control mit your men, you company
preaks, the regiment preaks, and the brigade goes to the tyfle. You go
mit your quarters, I prefer charges mit you." Here was a splendid
Prussian officer that at this late period of the war had not learned the
value of the volunteer soldier and that it was perfectly safe to treat
him when off duty like any other gentleman of equal merit. This fact was
known in our regiment from the start, and the difference between the
officer and the enlisted man was never asserted only for the purpose of
duty—the good of the service. The charges of the brave Prussian officer
were preferred in due time, and, before this movement that I have
described, were withdrawn at the instance of General Wm. B. Hazen, and
that was the last that was ever heard of the charges of "blaying cards
mit your men."

November 24th the mist hung heavy on the summit of Lookout and almost
hid the monarch of the Cumberlands from our view. Nothing occurred to
break the monotony of the soldier's life until about half past ten
o'clock a. m. a heavy firing commenced on the other side of Lookout from
us, and rumor (the soldiers telegraph) said "that Hooker was advancing
up the west and north sides of the mountain." This did not long lack
confirmation, for our fort on Cameron Hill soon commenced shelling the
woods that covered the mountain, save a cleared field just below the
palisades, in a very spirited manner. This fire was returned by the big
rebel guns mounted on the summit of Lookout, just above the palisades,
but for some reason seemed entirely ineffective.

How many of those present ever heard a vigorous cannonading in a
mountainous country? Of course, nearly all the old soldiers present to-
day have. The mountain ridges were so situated around Chattanooga that a
single discharge of a cannon would be repeated by the echo five and six
times, the second and third nearly as loud as the first discharge.

You can therefore imagine the grandeur of an artillery duel in these
mountains. General Grant ordered a battery down near Chattanooga creek,
that runs between the town and the base of the mountain, which did
effective work in shelling the woods all day, and must have been most
terribly annoying to the rebels. It was not long before we could tell by
the firing coming nearer that Hooker's veterans from the east were
driving the rebels before them, and soon the lines of blue smoke could
be seen rising above the trees. All eyes were now centered on Lookout,
and in a short time we could see the rebels had fallen back to the open
field below the palisades, in which at that time stood a farm house.

Presently we could see the lines of blue coming from out the woods into
the open field, and from their direction and extension they must have
reached from the base of the mountain to the palisades. The fighting
seemed heaviest on the east side of the open field; but nothing could
withstand the force of the constant charge that Hooker was making, and
when the sun went down the rebel line was driven back well along the
east side of the mountain and nearly opposite the west end of Missionary
Ridge. The skirmish lines kept up a constant fire until after midnight,
marking their positions by the continuous blaze of the musketry. Two
lines of musketry running up the steep sides of a mountain in plain
view, and constantly belching forth their tongues of flame, is a sight
most inspiring, and seen only once in a lifetime.

That night the rebels abandoned Lookout, and the next morning we greeted
the grand old stars and stripes floating proudly from the summit of that
mountain peak, in place of the traitorous emblem that we had been
compelled to gaze upon, in disgust, for so many long sad weeks.


                    THE BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE.

We fought the battle of Missionary Ridge with the great victory of the
battle of Lookout mountain as an inspiration, and the flag the gallant
Hooker planted there waiving above us.

Some have supposed that the battle of Missionary Ridge was fought
without any definite plan save to find the enemy and fight him, but this
is an error. While the battle of Missionary Ridge was a brilliant
success, could General Grant's plan have been carried out Bragg's entire
army must have been destroyed or captured. Hooker was ordered to
withdraw from the mountain early in the morning of the twenty-fifth,
cross Chattanooga creek and move up the valley to Rossville, and thereby
substantially turn Bragg's left flank. Sherman was to attack his right
flank at Tunnel Hill, while Thomas, in direct command of the Army of the
Cumberland, was to hold the center, and fall on his rear the moment he
saw any indications that Bragg was withdrawing to support his right or
left. But it was never intended that the ridge should be climbed in the
face of the enemy, without either of his flanks being turned or shaken.
No general ever dreamed of the storming of Missionary Ridge before the
charge began. The best plans of battles often fail of execution. When
General Hooker struck Chattanooga creek he found a stream he could not
ford, and was compelled to bridge in face of the enemy and under a heavy
fire. And instead of being able to reach Rossville early in the day, as
was expected by Grant, he found himself confronted by the enemy more
resolute and determined than had opposed him on the mountain the day
before.

Sherman opened the battle on our left with great vigor and
determination, and from our position we could see his charging columns;
but he found the enemy in a very strong position, naturally, improved by
very strong works, and he seemed to make little, if any, progress.

Our line ran through the edge of a small growth of timber. To the front
there was a soap-stone plateau of about six hundred yards, before
reaching the base of the ridge, where ran a line of the enemy's rifle
pits well filled with infantry. Our skirmish line covered the entire
front of the brigade, and soon after our position had been taken Colonel
Pickands came to the officers of the regiment with the order that "at
the firing of six guns from Fort Wood, and the sounding of the
_forward_, we must face to the front, and not suffer ourselves to be
checked until we put ourselves into the rebel works at the base of the
ridge."

No emotion was visible in the soldierly face of our brave colonel, save,
perhaps, a little more violent chewing of a large quid of the weed that
added rotundity to his bronzed weather-beaten cheek. His further order
was that we inform each man in the ranks of what was expected of him.
Commanding at the time company B, it was my painful duty to break the
news to those that I had known from boyhood, and that I had learned to
love as brothers. No one that I communicated the order to, but turned
pale.

If the Light Brigade, that Tennyson has immortalized, was ordered "into
the jaws of death, into the gates of hell," what was to be our fate
when, the moment our line struck the open plateau, one hundred guns
would be opened on us from the summit of the ridge; while the infantry,
safe in its works at the foot of the ridge, would be in deadly range
from the moment we emerged from the little strip of timber that
concealed our line. Now there was nothing to do but wait. Now the time
hung heavy. Now the soldier's thoughts were filled with home and the
loved ones left behind, and what would become of them if he should fall
in the terrific charge that he knew would soon have to be made.

It is the dreadful waiting that is more terrible than the shock of
battle. When once within the storm of the leaden hail the soldier seems
to rise to a higher plane of life; and while his comrades fall around
him, the din of battle in his ears, the groans of the wounded and dying,
the shouts of defiance of the enemy, and encouragement of his comrades
are ringing out on every hand, he feels as much the master of the storm
of battle as the eagle of the storm cloud.

But the waiting at last comes to an end. Hooker has found more
difficulties in pushing his column to the right of the ridge and in the
direction of Rossville, than had been anticipated, and as the sun was
slowly sinking toward the crest of Waldron's Ridge the cannon belched
forth from Fort Wood.

Every soldier of the 124th was instantly in position, and as the silvery
notes of the bugle sounded the _forward_, and breaking the awful silence
after the cannon's reverberations had ceased, the 124th, with clutched
muskets, rushed forth to the charge of death. As soon as we emerged from
the line of timber the rebel guns opened on us, and the whole ridge from
right to left blazed like a volcano. The earth trembled and shook as
though in the throes of an earthquake, while grape, canister, shell and
shrapnel bounded on the stony plain, like peas on the threshing floor.
The rebel infantry at the base of the ridge, seeing the impetuosity of
the charge, left their works and fled to their main line at the summit.
The terrible order had been obeyed. We had put ourselves into the rebel
works at the base of the ridge; and, looking back over the way we had
come, we saw the solid ranks of infantry moving toward us. The rebel
artillery from the top of the ridge opened terrible gaps and lanes in
those ranks of blue; but nothing daunted, onward, with steady step, they
come, until they mingle with us at the foot of the ridge. The terrible
order had been obeyed, and the mercenary soldier would have been content
to have remained in the comparative security afforded by the hill. Not
so the grand old Army of the Cumberland; not so the grand old 124th.
_Without orders_ the charge was at once resumed. The ridge in our front
is eight hundred feet above the level of the Tennessee; in some places
almost perpendicular, but in our front not so abrupt, but so steep that
the ascent was difficult to one without arms and accoutrements. On
rushed the gallant army; on rushed the gallant regiment. Every soldier
had all the ardor of a Phil. Sheridan. No opportunity to return the
galling fire. Comrades falling at every step, but at last the summit is
gained. The enemy completely routed. The guns of the rebels turned.
Plenty of ammunition found, but no friction primers. The ingenuity of
the 124th is equal to the occasion. A boy shouts "_stand back_," fires
his musket on the breech of the cannon, and the shell goes screeching
toward the ranks of the retreating enemy, adding consternation to panic.

On the left of where we broke the line the enemy still held out against
the heroic charge of the gallant Willich. Instantly a line of the 124th
is formed, the left half-wheel executed, and the rebels, finding their
flank attacked, crumble and finally flee in dismay. A battery of
artillery is descried in the front, being moved to the rear. Instantly
and without orders a few men form a skirmish line and advance, and in a
few seconds every horse is shot down. The guns proved to be a part of
the celebrated Loomis battery, taken by the rebels at Stone river.

But the red sun had gone down behind the ridge of the Cumberlands. The
stars and stripes float proudly from the entire length of Missionary
Ridge, where but a few hours before the flag of the traitor floated in
defiance of law and right. Then went up such a shout from that mountain-
top, as was only heard, "when the morning stars sang together, and all
the sons of God shouted for joy."

The share of the trophies of the 124th was seven cannon captured, among
which was the celebrated Washington Artillery of New Orleans, many
hundreds of prisoners, and a great amount of small arms.

The storming of Missionary Ridge is the most remarkable military success
that can be found recorded on the pages of history, of either ancient or
modern warfare. General Grant, who was an eyewitness of the battle, says
in his official report, "the troops rushed forward, drove the enemy from
the rifle pits at the base of the ridge like bees from a hive, stopped
but a moment until the whole was in line, and commenced the ascent of
the mountain from right to left, almost simultaneously, following
closely the retreating enemy _without further orders_. They encountered
a fearful volley of grape and canister from one hundred pieces of
artillery and musketry from still well-filled pits on the summit of the
ridge. Not a waiver, however, was seen in all that line of brave men.
Their progress was steadily onward until the summit was in their
possession. I can account for this only on the theory that the enemy's
surprise at the audacity of such a charge caused confusion, and
purposeless aiming of their pieces."

The rebel general, Bragg, in his official report, says: "No satisfactory
excuse can possibly be given for the shameful conduct of our troops in
allowing the line to be frustrated. The position was one that ought to
have been held by a line of skirmishers _against any assaulting column_.
Those who reached the ridge did so in a condition of exhaustion from the
great physical exertion in climbing, which rendered them powerless, and
the slightest effort would have destroyed them."

Napoleon's veterans charged the muzzle of whole parks of Russian
artillery at Borodino, but they had solid columns and the force of great
numbers, and no obstacles to overcome in making that world-renowned
charge.

The Light Brigade charged the Russian redoubt at Balaklava, only to be
swept away by the concentrated fire of the Russian batteries; but they
had the impetuosity of a cavalry movement to drive them on _en masse_,
while the storming of Missionary Ridge was the individual heroism of
each and every man in that grand Army of the Cumberland, and is only
explained by the _rebel general_ substantially calling his brave men
cowards, who fought at Shiloh, Stone river, and had so recently been
victorious on the dread field of Chickamauga.

The great battle of Missionary Ridge was won by the _individual moral
force of the volunteer union soldier_, never known before to the history
of warfare.

That evening the moon rose over the summit of Tunnel hill, and shone
smilingly along the bare and desolate side of Missionary Ridge, as
though the soil was not wet with the blood of brothers. There, lying
close to the rebel parapet, was the young and brave captain, James H.
Frost, of Company I, his calm face bathed by the soft moonlight and
looking as peaceful as though an angel guarded his slumbers.

Further down the bloody track of the 124th lay twenty-two of its braves,
"sleeping the sleep that knows not breaking."

                "The tempest may roar,
                And the loud cannon rattle,
                They hear not, they heed not,
                They're free from all pain.
                They sleep their last sleep,
                They have fought their last battle,
                No sound can awake them to glory again."

More than twenty-seven years have passed since that heroic struggle on
the steep mountain side of Missionary Ridge. The blue and the gray sleep
side by side in the National Cemetery at its base. Chattanooga, then a
small war-battered village, has grown, by northern capital and northern
industry, to be an important iron manufacturing city. The Tennessee runs
its bright and winding way around the proud Lookout, but no rebel yell
pollutes the air, and no rebel rag defies the national authority, but
all is peace and order, industry and law. And so we bid farewell to the
contemplation of one of those great sacrifices that "saved us a nation."




               THE EAST TENNESSEE CAMPAIGN, AND THE MARCH
                     FROM CHATTANOOGA TO KNOXVILLE.


Hooker's victorious legions had descended from Lookout. The battle of
Missionary Ridge had been fought and won. General Geary's division of
the 20th Corps had followed the beaten and disheartened Bragg to
Ringgold, and there attacking the enemy in his entrenched position on
the White Oak mountains, had suffered a repulse in which the gallant 7th
and 8th Ohio lost severely. It was there that the idols of the 7th,
Colonels Crane and Creighton, fell. But our portion of the army advanced
no further south at that time, and the 20th Corps went into winter
quarters. But no such needed rest and recuperation, after the long time
of siege and starvation at Chattanooga, seemed to fall to the lot of the
4th Corps of the Army of the Cumberland.

The twenty-sixth day of November, 1863, the day after the battle of
Missionary Ridge, we spent in gathering up our beloved dead from off the
mountainside where they had charged so gallantly the day before. We
brought each regiment's sleeping braves and composed them in long lines,
each company's by itself. I wish those that love war, that are filled
with martial ardor, that are hoping that some complication will involve
us in a war with Great Britain, could have walked with me along those
lines of noble dead. There lay in peaceful slumber all ages, all sizes
and forms of men, from the heavy, tall and bearded man of fifty to the
smooth-faced lad of fifteen.

O, could we feel the breaking hearts of wife, mother, father, sister,
brother, and affianced, when the shouting was over, when the headlines
of the _great victory_ had become familiar, when the congratulatory
orders and proclamations had been issued and read, and the cold, sad
news had been conveyed to each home that claimed a loved one lost in
that great victory—then, and only then, could we know and feel the real
horrors of war. Then, I am sure, all those that love war and delight in
the clash of arms would lift their voices for peace—lasting peace. We
soldiers were not the real sufferers—they were the sad, loving hearts at
home. But then, as now, duty was not to the dead, but to the living.
Their manly forms wrapped in their martial cloaks (the soldier's coarse
blanket) were tenderly buried on that beautiful elevation known as
Orchard Knob, which was the beginning of that National Cemetery where
all the wealth that a grateful nation and a loving people could lavish
has made it, in walks, drives, fountains, lawns, marbles, shrubbery and
flowers, one of the most beautiful places on earth. Here the name and
rank of each soldier is registered, when known, but alas, there are
thousands there that fill unknown and nameless graves.

But the news of the siege of Knoxville had come to us from the hundreds
of miles to the northward. Longstreet's Corps of the army of northern
Virginia had been detached from Bragg's army before the battle of
Missionary Ridge; Bragg, relying upon the strength of the natural
fortifications that he held, considered that it was only a question of
time when the battered remnants of Rosecrans' army, that had been
withdrawn from the lost field of Chickamauga, must succumb to want and
hunger; and the corps commanded by Longstreet, and some other forces of
the enemy in the north and east parts of Tennessee, could soon render
the situation of Burnside at Knoxville as helpless as ours at
Chattanooga. But the fortunes of war, like all other things, change with
time. Rosecrans had been suspended and Hooker had been sent by Scranton
to the Tennessee in so short a space of time that the feat was the
comment and wonder of the watching world. Grant and Sherman had met.

The greatest living tactician and the most consummate handler of men,
were in counsel. Then, as I have stated, Bragg was beaten and driven
away, and Sherman marched to relieve Burnside. He was given entire
command, and within two days after the smoke of the battle of Missionary
Ridge had cleared away from the hilltops and mountains around about
Chattanooga, Sherman's army was on the march up the Tennessee river for
Knoxville, keeping on the east side of the valley.

The first day our brigade only marched two miles, having to wait for the
other brigades and divisions to get out of the way.

We crossed the Chickamauga river a short distance above Chattanooga on a
pontoon bridge that had been put down by some brigade of General
Sherman's army. The next obstruction that we encountered was a river
that comes in from the east, the name of which has slipped my memory.
This had to be crossed by the aid of a small river steamboat that had
the capacity of taking over not much more than a company at a trip, and
we became very impatient waiting this tedious process of transfer. It
was a stern-wheel wheezy affair, and I remember the boys rechristened it
"The River Snail," and we put in our time making jokes at the expense of
the boat and crew, that acted as though the service they rendered was a
matter of force, and that they worked neither for love of country nor
compensation. At last we were safely across the river, and the old
stern-wheeler, years agone, marks some sand bar on the Tennessee or some
of its beautiful tributaries. Shortly after this steamboat ride of
almost one hundred feet we went into camp; the night was clear and cold,
and not being very well supplied with blankets, we had difficulty in
getting much sleep from Old Mr. Morpheus, the god that the ancients
supposed had charge of that soothing business.

November 29th we passed through the village of Georgetown, and here we
saw the stars and stripes first displayed by any citizens of the south.
The women came out and waived handkerchiefs and almost anything else
they could get hold of, while the "Old Blind Mice"[3] made the air vocal
with shouts and cheers for the first people that seemed to love the old
flag that we had seen since we left Louisville, Ky. These poor people
had had their homes desolated, had been robbed of what few stores they
had by the rebel army, and, having the name of being union people, they
had been common plunder for every rebel trooper whose rough ride had
taken him into their village. No wonder they cheered and threw the old
flags they had kept during all those dark years of murder, pillage and
rapine to the breeze, when they saw "Uncle Billy" marching northward
with his army that would drive the hated rebel from their own beautiful
valley.

Footnote 3:

  The pet name of the 124th.

December 6th found us in the valley of the Little Tennessee river, a
beautiful stream of water, clear as cut glass. This valley is one of the
most wealthy sections of east Tennessee. It may be rivaled by the
Sweetwater valley, perhaps. The inhabitants of these valleys being rich
before the war, and slaveholders, showed nothing but rebel proclivities.
We marched through what had been once a beautiful village, called
Marysville. It must have had at one time some two thousand population,
but it was sadly out of repair. There had been a cavalry fight in its
streets, and there was not a whole light of glass remaining on the
street that we marched through, and the houses showed plainly the marks
of the carbine and cannon shot.

It was at about this point that General Sherman issued his famous order,
to wit: "That any company, regiment or brigade, that struck the enemy,
should open the battle without regard to the position of the balance of
the army, and without awaiting further orders." This was conclusive
proof we were approaching Knoxville, and must be within the vicinity of
Longstreet's army, and we expected to hear the battle open every minute.
But the rebel general was, without doubt, well versed in the literature
of the nursery, and well remembered "that he who fights and runs away,
may live to fight another day. While he who is in battle slain, can
never rise to fight again." General Longstreet, hearing of the near
approach of Sherman's army, attacked Fort Saunders, was dreadfully
repulsed and then abandoned the siege of Knoxville, without one of
Sherman's army having the chance to unload a musket at the boasting
veterans of the army of northern Virginia.

Monday, December 7th, we marched within two miles of Knoxville and went
into camp, having marched from Chattanooga in ten days, over two hundred
miles the way we came, having carried our rations in our haversacks, and
eighty rounds of cartridges to the man, never having a wagon after we
left Chattanooga. Here we met the 103d O. V. I. The major of the 103d
was a brother of our Lieutenant Colonel Pickands, and we were well
acquainted with many of the boys of that regiment. The greetings that
followed were not only cordial and heartfelt, but enthusiastic, and the
shouts that went forth when the boys found that Burnside's army had been
reinforced by the army that marched fresh from one of the most important
victories of the war more than two hundred miles to relieve them, awoke
the echoes among the hills of the north.

We were tired and foot-sore and (to be candid about it), even at this
late day, I remember that we much preferred being cheered to fighting
Longstreet. Those gallant fellows offered us everything they had in the
world save something to eat and drink, which they had not.

After a night of rest only known to tired, foot-sore soldiers, "free
from war's alarms," Lieutenant Stedman and myself procured passes and
went into the city of Knoxville. This was the largest city we had seen
since we left Nashville, and had a very neat and healthy appearance,
considering that it had been at times the headquarters for both rebel
and union armies. This city is situated at the confluence of the French
Broad river, that rises in the Blue Ridge mountains of North Carolina,
and the Holston, that comes down from the Cumberland mountains of
northeast Tennessee and Virginia, forming the Tennessee river that flows
past the city in a deep rapid current. The Tennessee river at Knoxville
is one of those glorious streams that the lover of nature never views
without interest, and usually with delight.

Knoxville, with its beautiful streets, its bright and bounding river,
its mountains on the west and north, just near enough to be romantic,
with a naturally rich valley flanking it on all sides, must ever remain
one of the nicest, and one of the most delightful, towns in the world. I
have not been there since the war, but I am told by those that have,
that, with its unbounded wealth of iron, coal and marble, as well as its
splendid agricultural resources, added a climate that is neither
tropical nor northern, but the happy mean between the two, its growth
has been great and substantial. I suppose a member of the Blind Mice,
finding himself in the Knoxville of to-day, would hardly know it from
what he remembers of the Knoxville he marched to relieve in the early
winter of 1863-64.

This was the home of the celebrated Parson Brownlow, and I well remember
that on going down the main street of the city this day that we first
visited Knoxville, of seeing his brave and beautiful daughter, Kate,
standing under the flag, bowing and smiling to the union soldiers as
they raised their caps to her; all in very great contrast to her
demeanor when the rebels held the city and she kept that same flag
floating in defiance of the rebel crew that surrounded her on every
hand.

We promised her that the rebel foot should never again press the streets
of Knoxville save in captivity; a promise that we kept and proved true,
but how much _our valor_ contributed to that result we will see further
on.

This same Parson Brownlow had two sons in the union army, James and
John, commanding at that time east Tennessee regiments.

We went down to the north end of the town and found a barber shop in
full blast, and concluded that we would indulge in the benefits
conferred by the tonsorial artist; so taking the chair without inquiry
as to terms, had our locks put in shape, and our faces made more
presentable; but when the time for the settlement came we found the
artist only charged fifty cents for hair cutting and thirty cents for
shaving, which caused us some surprise.

We next concluded to visit Fort Saunders, that General Longstreet had
made up his mind to take a few mornings before we arrived in that
vicinity. Of course we did not see the battle, and all I can give you is
what we saw after several days had passed. I am not certain, but I
should say that Fort Saunders stood northwesterly of the city, and a
full mile out from the same. I do not know whether the fort was built by
General Burnside or not, but I think it was built by him after he was
sent to that department, as the moats and parapets seemed new. There
must have been timber standing on the easterly and northerly sides at no
very great time before, as the ground was covered with stumps, and they
seemed new and strong, as though the timber had been recently cut.
General Burnside's men, expecting the assault (as Fort Saunders seemed
to be the key to General Burnside's position), had contrived a very
ingenious way of defense. They procured a large quantity of telegraph
wire, and stretched it from one stump to another about knee high,
winding it around each stump a few times to make it secure. This they
did with seemingly very great industry, for nearly all the approaches to
the fort were a perfect network of wire. They also loaded a large number
of shell with fuzes cut at about five seconds, and had them placed handy
when the time came for the assault. This I have from one of the
defenders of the fort.

Just as the dawn was breaking in the east General Longstreet's
assaulting column drove in the pickets, and, with that yell that once
heard is never forgotten, came dashing on toward the fort; but when they
reached the wire they did some ground and lofty tumbling, mostly ground,
and the fort opened a most terrible fire of musketry, shot and shell.
But nothing daunted, though their formation was badly broken up, they
came on and soon filled the ditches around the fort. Then the shells
were lighted and thrown over the parapets into the ditches, making
fearful havoc as they exploded among the swarming rebels. I suppose a
more determined and bloody charge was never made during the war. The
rebels even climbed up the embrasures of the fort, and the cannoneers
cut them down with axes.

But the short range shells and the heroic resistance made by the
defenders of the fort were too much for the unquestioned heroism of the
assailants, and what remained of them straggled back, as best they
could, to the main body of Longstreet's army.

I will not attempt to give a description of the scene in the ditches and
around the fort. It beggars all the horrors that language can describe.
When we visited the fort of course all the dead and wounded had been
removed; but when we came to walk along the bottom of the moats that
surrounded the fort, the evidences of the sanguinary conflict still
remained. Here lay a tongue, there, an ear, and beyond, a jaw bone. I
saw a hand lying opposite one of the embrasures of the fort that was cut
off as smoothly as though severed with one blow from an ax; but though
we rejoiced in a defense that saved General Burnside's army, we were
glad to leave this scene of horror and return to camp where the Mice
were resting their weary limbs after the terrible march that we had
endured.

December 29th, 1863, we moved our camp to the north into a fine piece of
woods, and remained there until the year 1863 had gone. What a year of
marchings, battles, and sorrow. How many of those that left Camp
Cleveland with us—just one year before—now "sleep the sleep that knows
not breaking." What a change in our regiment. Our ranks have been
thinned, but our effectiveness has been increased. We have been tried in
all the sad experiences of war. Patriotism brought to our ranks very
many never calculated, either physically or mentally, to make soldiers.
Their intentions were high and noble, and they failed by no fault of
theirs; their final discharge was a mercy to them, and a blessing to us.
Many came home and abandoned army service forever. Many enlisted in
other regiments, for shorter terms and less arduous duties; but, as a
rule, _all did all they could_ to maintain the integrity of the Union.

January 1st, 1864, opened the most eventful year of the war. Each army
had come to its full strength and vigor. "The summer soldier and the
sunshine patriot" had long since retired, and we had a man as commander
in chief of all the armies that had the correct notion of the way of
putting down the rebellion. A man that realized that the theory of
conquering rebel territory while the rebel armies remained intact was
worse than useless. That if armies are to be destroyed, the quicker it
can be accomplished, the more precious lives saved. Great and decisive
battles, with all their untold horrors, are angels of mercy compared to
the small battle, the skirmish, where a few are lost and nothing
accomplished.

But I find myself digressing, by the thoughts that come crowding up, as
I contemplate the _value_(?) of our east Tennessee campaign of 1864.

January 14th we struck tents, and crossing the river marched twenty-two
miles to a position known as Strawberry Plains. I never knew why they
called it by that name unless it was because it had no appearance of
ever having grown any strawberries, or because the foothills of the
Clinch mountains were too rough and irregular to be called plains. I
guess the fellow that furnished the name had never been away from home.

On this march we saw the gallows where four citizens of east Tennessee
were executed. The gallows stood hard by the side of the railroad track.
These men were executed for a very heinous crime. It may be briefly
stated: They loved their country and their country's flag too well to
swear allegiance to the southern confederacy, and so they were put to
death.

The next day we marched to Dandridge, a small village situated on the
French Broad river, and camped in a beautiful pine woods.

Here we had orders from Colonel Pickands to fix up winter quarters, as
we would probably stay _right here_ until the spring campaign opened,
and the pine poles were just the material from which to construct winter
quarters of the most commodious kind. For the benefit of the Sons of
Veterans I will describe the process. You must remember at this time we
were soldiers, and soldiers of the Uncle Billy pattern and kind. If we
had any shelter, save the starry heavens, we had to carry that shelter
on our backs, as well as our camp equipage. Now, at this time, you must
also remember that our regiment was divided into messes, and that by the
process of _natural selection_ four men would come together and call
each other Pard. What there was that kept these messes together I never
knew. I said they came together by _natural selection_ for the reason
that when we find anything that we cannot explain we call it _natural_
and let it go. These messes of _four_ would sing, quarrel, fight, make-
up and divide all they had with each other inside of twenty minutes.
Each member of each mess would swear that there were not three as good
foragers in the regiment as his three messmates. Somehow or other, a
good forager was always held up as a patron saint in the 124th Regiment.
Chaplain Hubbard, of the 103d O. V. I., was the "bright and morning
star" in this business of all the members of the army of occupation of
east Tennessee. I call it the army of occupation because, before I am
done, you will see that is all we did. Well, to resume, each one of
these four messmates would carry one piece, at least, of shelter tent.
Sometimes more could be found, but usually, where more were found, _some
others had less_. This _more_ or _less_ business was a common thing in
the army.

Now in the first place the streets were laid out, which streets were the
parade grounds of the several companies, where they were formed and
marched to the regimental parade ground. The stumps, when we camped in
the woods, were carefully dug out of these streets, and the same nicely
graded and ditched. Then at the left-hand side looking toward the
regimental parade ground the quarters of the messes were erected. This I
know will seem very commonplace to the old comrade, but you will bear
with me, as I am speaking to-day to many Sons of Veterans and others,
that were too young to be with us in this experience. The poles were
then cut long enough to cover with two pieces of shelter tent, then laid
up, notched at the corners to bring them down quite close, laid up high
enough so the soldier could stand upright comfortably. The ends or
gables were cobbed up to the peak, or fixed up with the extra tents,
poles were fastened on with bark or withes, and the tents make the roof.
Then the cracks were stopped with mud. A stick or stone chimney is built
in the back end. Two bunks are made, one on either side, with crotches
driven into the ground, and small poles laid lengthwise and covered with
pine boughs and the U. S. army blanket make the bed. Gun-racks are made
above each bunk for two muskets and two sets of accouterments. An extra
blanket is hung up for a door, and the house is furnished by the
inventive genius of the mess. The bunks during the daytime furnish
upholstered seats. This house answers for kitchen, dining room, and
dormitory, and a healthier home does not stand in the city of Cleveland.
One of the best features of the whole business is, they were not liable
to sale under execution, or foreclosure, neither for delinquent taxes.
This house I have described was one of a large city our division built
at Dandridge. Please note how long they were suffered to enjoy the
fruits of their ingenuity and industry.

If I were called upon to organize an army that should accomplish the
greatest warlike good (if the word _good_ can be used in connection with
the word _war_), I would start, in our experience as soldiers, where we
left off. The government should never build quarters for soldiers, they
should build their own. The government should never furnish any
transportation for well soldiers, and instead of staying in camp, I
would have them move from place to place, thereby avoiding the disease
that camps breed. The sooner the soldier becomes self-sustaining, within
a certain limit, the better for themselves and the service.

January 16th Colonel Pickands came to my quarters and said he had a soft
snap for me; said that I had never had a detail, that I had stayed right
with the regiment since we took the field, and he was only too glad to
confer this favor. I thanked the genial commander, though I had no
desire to leave the Mice in that way; and had but very little confidence
in what he said he heard from headquarters, "that we would probably stay
where we were for three months." About ten o'clock a. m. the detail was
ready, consisting of 149 men. The order was to march to New Market and
guard the division stores. We went through a fairly good country, and
along in the afternoon we met General Sheridan and staff. He was riding
that same black horse that afterward "carried him into the fray from
Winchester, twenty miles away." He asked a number of questions. The
first was, if I had heard any firing in the direction of Dandridge? This
question showed the true instinct of the great general; that he was
always looking out for a battle, and had he been in command of the union
forces in east Tennessee, the country would have been electrified by the
news of a signal victory won, instead of a disastrous retreat from
Dandridge, whereby so many of our poor boys were captured, and carried
to Andersonville and death. Soon after we bade good-bye to Sheridan and
staff one of the Mice, and he must have been one of the kind known as
_ground mice_, found an apple-hole, and before I was aware of what was
going on, the Mice were all busy digging out apples. The owner came out
and protested; said he was a union man, had been from the start, and his
property should be protected. I agreed in all he said, and by the time
his protest was fully entered his apples had been transferred to the
capacious haversacks of the Mice. Of course I was to blame. I should not
have suffered the Mice to gnaw and destroy this good man's apples; but
what, I ask you, could I do with 149 men that had not seen or tasted an
apple since the fall of 1862? I offered to give him a voucher for the
apples, and told him if he was as good a union man as he claimed to be
the commissary department at Knoxville would pay him. But he seemed to
know what the voucher was worth better than I and declined the same; we
marched on to New Market, arriving there after dark, having marched
twenty-three miles since ten o'clock.

I soon found nice quarters for my men in the abandoned houses of the
village, and my mess arrangements having been broken up, I engaged
boarding with an old lady that had two sons in the union army. This was
one of the worst battered towns I had seen in the south. The sentiment
was about equally divided between union and rebel, and the town had been
badly plundered by both sides. The stores were at the station on the
railroad, and after relieving the men on duty with a detail of my men,
had supper, and being very tired, the old lady showed me a room, and I
went to bed between nice white sheets, the first time in more than
twelve months. Visions of feather beds, soft bread, pies and cakes, no
marching, no picket guard, haunted me until 3 o'clock the next morning,
when I was awakened by a loud rapping at my door; on getting out I saw
the yellow stripes of a cavalry orderly. He very politely handed me an
order directing me to march my detail back to Strawberry Plains, as the
army was falling back from Dandridge. I got out to the quarters of the
men as soon as I could, aroused the orderly sergeant and the men, called
in the guards at the station, and started back on the railway track for
the point to which we had been ordered. And that ended the "_soft
snap_."

The winter quarters the Mice had built, the city one day old, was
abandoned, and the brigade, wearied out by marching in the deepest mud I
ever saw, slept that night under the stars at Strawberry Plains. What
became of the stores at New Market I never knew, and why we were ordered
back I never knew. All I know about the matter is that Uncle Billy had
gone north to meet Grant at Cincinnati, and General Sheridan was not in
command.

We lost more men on the retreat from Dandridge than would have been lost
in a battle with Longstreet, and we had men enough to have whipped him
and driven him out of the state. But "the grand army of occupation" was
permitted to do no fighting, and so we wallowed around in the mud of
east Tennessee.

In a few days we marched down to Knoxville and below to a place named in
honor of one of America's greatest poets, I guess; in any event, it had
the poetical name of Lenore, and if not _loved_, it certainly seemed
_lost_. It may have been found since the war, but it was certainly _lost
Lenore_ when we were there.

I suppose no part of the south suffered so much in the way of partisan
warfare as east Tennessee. This part of the state owned very few slaves,
and the inhabitants were largely true to the union cause. Of course, the
wealthy portion of the people were slaveholders, and they were rebels to
a man, and middle Tennessee, Georgia, Virginia, and some portions of
North Carolina were intensely rebel, and thus you will understand that
east Tennessee was surrounded by a disloyal population. Then, again, the
Tennessee valley was the principal gateway from Richmond to the
southwest and, until the occupation of Knoxville by General Burnside,
this valley was continually being overrun by rebel troops of all sorts,
from infantry to mounted bushwhackers. The disloyal, when the rebel army
was present, informed on their loyal neighbors, and the old men, the
women, and the children had to seek safety in the woods, ravines, and
caves of the mountains, only to see their dear old homes in flames
behind them. Even the learned and respected Judge Baxter, afterwards
appointed judge of the United States circuit court, who, before the war,
had a fine residence and lucrative practice in the city of Knoxville,
was compelled to "lie out in the bush," as they call it, for three
months at one time, to save his life; and yet with most remarkable
magnanimity, through Judge Baxter's influence, not an acre of rebel land
or a rebel home was confiscated in the whole of east Tennessee. While we
were in one of the many camps about Knoxville, the two regiments
commanded by the Brownlow brothers, James and John, veteranized, and
under the order of the government were granted thirty days' leave of
absence. I happened to be present at the time they disbanded. One of
these brothers made a speech to the two regiments. I don't remember
which one, but I never can forget one thing he said: "Take your arms
with you; you will not be wanted here for thirty days. Go home and
avenge the death of your fathers and brothers." This speech was received
by these hardy mountaineers as a license, as it was intended to be, for
murder and the desolating torch. Not a night from that time on for
thirty days but the heavens were aglare with the flames of rebel homes,
and the number of murders committed will never be known "until the sea
gives up its dead." But never did the horrors of Indian massacre compare
with east Tennessee for deeds of murder and fiendish, remorseless
cruelty from 1861 to 1865.

Then on the 17th moved back in the rain and mud, and went into camp; and
then on the 23d moved forward again, found no enemy and then back to
camp, having marched that day in the rain and mud twenty-eight miles.
Then on the 24th we struck tents and marched twelve miles beyond
Knoxville to Strawberry Plains again. Then we were up and off to New
Market. Then the next day marched to Morristown, eighteen miles from New
Market, and occupied the abandoned quarters built by Longstreet's men.
Stayed in this camp until March 2d, 1864, and then marched back to New
Market. This marching and counter marching is of no particular interest
of itself, but I give it to you to show how we put in the time. Of all
the campaigning we ever did this of east Tennessee was the most
purposeless, seemingly profitless, and dismal. The most of the time we
were hard up for rations, and were compelled to forage on a people as
friendly as any in Ohio, and that had been robbed by both armies. I
never can forget the time we lay at Clinch Mountain Gap, when it was so
cold that we had to build log-heaps in front of our tents to keep from
freezing, that Colonel Pickands sent Lieutenant Stedman with a file of
men and a wagon to try and find something to eat. I was at headquarters
when he returned at night. The colonel, with that usual smile, said:
"Lieutenant, what success to-day?" Stedman answered: "Nothing." "Why?"
remarked the colonel. Stedman replied, with an oath so terrific that I
am sure it was heard in Heaven (and which I hope the recording angel has
blotted out, and I know he has if he has attended strictly to business),
"that he would be —— —— before he would rob women and children." When
the recording angel became acquainted with the noble Stedman, fresh from
the bloody field of New Hope Church, I am sure the accounts were
properly adjusted.

Well, this must end my recollections of the very celebrated march from
Chattanooga to Knoxville and the winter campaign of east Tennessee.

General Longstreet finally went back to the army of northern Virginia,
not that he was in any danger from us, but simply because he became
tired of the scenery and wanted a change, I suppose.

Nothing in history is grander than the relief of Knoxville; nothing
tamer and more devoid of sense than the balance of the campaign. Yet we
can draw from it all this useful lesson, that those brave spirits, the
noble men that endured the march and campaign, had a patriotism and
endurance that nothing of storm, of cold, of hunger, of sickness, of bad
management could dampen. And though many of that band sleep in southern
graves, yet many lived to bring back the stars and stripes in triumph
from the greatest conflict of modern times and to see the rebellious
states restored to a peaceful and happy union.

[Illustration:

  _LIEUTENANT CHARLES M. STEADMAN._

  _Killed at Pickett's Mills, Georgia. May 27th, 1864._
]




                         THE ATLANTA CAMPAIGN.


The spring of 1864 opened with millions of anxious patriots looking in
the direction of our armies.

General Grant had virtually been made commander in chief of all the
union forces, with personal direction of the Army of the Potomac.

Every lover of his country had come to understand that the policy of
conquering rebel territory and guarding rebel property would never crush
out rebellion.

The military policy of General Grant, of making the objective point of
campaigns _the rebel armies_, met the good sense and received the hearty
approval of the patriotic people of the United States.

Some raised the cry of "butcher," but every thoughtful man that knew the
desperate intentions, the bravery, the skill, and the strong defensive
positions occupied by the rebel armies, knew that their destruction
meant severe marches, terribly destructive battles, thousands of brave
men killed, and vastly more wounded and maimed for life; but in the face
of all these mighty sacrifices, that the poverty of language will not
enable us to describe, the patriotic people of the north said, "We will
sustain the army at all hazards," and the armies responded, "Let us set
forward."

It is a well-known fact that in the winter of 1864, at the Burnett House
in the city of Cincinnati, Ohio, the two greatest generals developed by
the war, Grant and Sherman, met in counsel. Sherman, while a line
officer in the regular army, had become most thoroughly acquainted with
the topography of the state of Georgia, and it was at this consultation
that the campaign from Chattanooga to Atlanta and the grand march "from
Atlanta to the sea" were developed and determined upon. It was at this
consultation that Sherman said, "The confederacy is a shell and I can
march an army through it." It was at this consultation that Grant said,
"If you undertake it, I will hold Lee and his armies, that they give you
no trouble." At the end of this meeting each of the great commanders
repaired to his respective scene of action to carry forward the purposes
determined on thereat.

The first of May, 1864, found assembled in the vicinity of Chattanooga,
and as far south as Ringgold, Ga., the forces with which General Sherman
proposed to crush the shell of the rebellion. It consisted of the Army
of the Cumberland, General George H. Thomas in command; the Army of the
Tennessee, under the especial command of General McPherson; the 23d
Corps, commanded by General Schofield; the 20th Army Corps, still in
command of the hero of Lookout mountain, "Fighting Joe Hooker," as he
was often called in army circles, and also a brigade of regulars. Then
as able lieutenants in command of corps and divisions, Sherman had
Logan, Blair, Sickels, Stanley, Wood, Slocum, Osterhaus, and many
others, _all fighting officers_. Sheridan, at that time, had been
transferred to the Army of the Potomac by the especial order of General
Grant, who witnessed General Sheridan's heroic conduct at Missionary
Ridge.

I suppose very few of the people of the north ever had anything like a
correct idea of the magnitude of the work undertaken by General Sherman
in the campaign of Atlanta. The distance from Louisville to Nashville is
stated to be one hundred and eighty-five miles, and from Nashville to
Chattanooga it is said to be one hundred and fifty-one miles, and from
Nashville to Bridgeport on the Tennessee river, two hundred and eleven
miles. This long line of railway from Louisville to Chattanooga, and
from Nashville to Bridgeport, Ala., five hundred and forty-seven miles,
had to be guarded by military force every mile. For it must be
remembered that while the state of Kentucky never went out of the Union
and was ostensibly a loyal state, nevertheless, it required more
soldiers to look after its disloyal citizens than she furnished to the
cause of the Union, not for one moment forgetting that the state of
Kentucky furnished some as brave and loyal soldiers as ever sprung a
rammer and some as valiant officers as ever drew a saber.
Notwithstanding, she had a large population in the aggregate that
engaged in that disreputable kind of warfare known as _bushwhacking_,
and very many that did not were ever ready to furnish aid and comfort to
our enemy. Again, no portion of Tennessee, save east Tennessee, laid any
claim to anything but intense love of the southern confederacy.
Blockhouses had to be constructed every few miles of this route and a
vast number of soldiers employed in keeping open this line of
communications. Nashville was the grand base of supplies, where had been
accumulated for many months all kinds of army stores, and from this base
General Sherman had to draw supplies of rations, ammunition, and
clothing for his campaign in Georgia; while the route from Nashville to
Louisville must be kept open to renew the supplies at the base, as well
as to send the sick and wounded to the northern hospitals.

It is almost needless for me to state before this intelligent audience
that the genius of General Sherman was entirely equal to the emergency.
And while the oddities and comical features of great men will usually be
better remembered than any others, those of us that participated in that
memorable campaign will remember well that no precautionary matter was
overlooked by the ever watchful general. If what he really meant by
"light marching order" was so difficult to understand that a cavalryman
construed it to mean "necktie and a pair of spurs," he was no less
exacting of himself and staff and many a night on this campaign he
bivouacked as would a picket on an outpost. The thoroughness of his
preparation was the sequel of his success. Knowing very well that
overrunning rebel territory did not make loyal citizens of its
inhabitants, he took the precaution to have his engineers make drawings
of every wooden bridge between Louisville and Chattanooga, and between
Nashville and Bridgeport. Nor was this all. He had his corps of
mechanics construct duplicate bridges for the entire line south of
Nashville. He was not satisfied only with his precautions to guard and
care for his line of communications to his base of supplies, but he in
some manner procured plans of the bridges from Chattanooga to Atlanta,
and had bridges constructed and loaded on flat cars ready for use at any
time when wanted. It was perfectly astounding the perfect order and
dispatch with which he reconstructed the railroads as his campaign
progressed, and with such celerity did his engineer corps perform its
duty that after the bridge was burned by the rebel rear guards the same
would be rebuilt, and the screams of the locomotive would mingle with
the rattle of the musketry of the skirmishers just across the river,
always reminding us that Uncle Billy's railroad was in good working
order and that our "cracker line" was secure. But the vigilance of his
preparation was not satisfied with being able to keep up his railroad
lines—he had the finest pontoon corps that was ever organized.

Each man was drilled in the movements necessary to put down a pontoon
bridge or remove one from the water and replace the same on the wagons
as efficiently as an infantryman in the manual of arms or a cannoneer in
the handling of a fieldpiece. It was a sight that seemed the perfection
of celerity to witness his pontoon corps put down a bridge, and every
line of march was thoroughly equipped in this particular.

But what I have heretofore described were not all the obstacles in the
way of the making of the Atlanta campaign a success. While we were
beyond the Tennessee mountains, while we had crossed the Tennessee
river, the country from Ringgold to the south bank of the Chattahoochee
river was naturally most admirable defensive ground. Every few miles
were high ridges and small mountain ranges remarkably well adapted for
defensive military positions; added to this the enemy had no rear that
required guarding, had no hostile population to watch and distrust, had
the most accurate information as to streams and roads, had swarms of
volunteer spies to inform him of our every movement, and finally, had an
army of slaves to do his intrenching ready to his hand and use when he
was ready to fall back to a new position. This, all this, and more than
I have time to describe, must be considered if we would thoroughly
comprehend the military magnitude of the Atlanta campaign.

When General Sherman was ready to commence the forward movement, there
must have been assembled from Chattanooga to Ringgold between eighty and
one hundred thousand men, and on the third day of May, 1864, just as the
magnolias were beginning to open their fragrant blossoms to the south
wind, and the mocking birds were beginning to make the woods vocal with
their songs, our division struck tents and commenced the march
southward, and the evening of the fourth found us two and one-half miles
from Ringgold confronting the enemy's pickets. From this time until the
ninth we made short marches southward, skirmishing with the rebels each
day. On the ninth our brigade was composed of the 124th O. V. I., the
41st O. V. I. the 93d O. V. I., the 9th I. V. I., and the 6th Ky. V. I.
The brigade was commanded by General William B. Hazen and we had moved
as far toward Dalton as a position known locally as Buzzard's Roost, a
pass in the White Oak mountains. Here we found the rebels in position,
the pass strongly fortified and commanded by a number of heavy guns.

At this position our brigade had an order to charge the mountain at the
left of the pass, which order was executed, and we came within two
hundred yards of the top of the mountain, where we found it broken off
into palisades thirty feet in height. These palisades we had no means of
ascending and so the charge ended. Our regiment lost three men killed
and ten wounded. This movement was afterwards explained as a
demonstration to deceive the enemy, but some of us will always think
that we were the ones that were deceived. There was heavy firing on the
right of the pass and in the direction of Snake Creek Gap, where a
portion of Hooker's Corps fought a severe battle, the 29th O. V. I.
losing very heavily. While in this position (Buzzard's Roost) we were
terribly annoyed by sharpshooters posted above the palisades, the bugler
of the 93d being killed.

All things considered, this position was properly named, and had Dore
been there he could, without doubt, within the wilds of that mountain,
have found some new illustrations for Dante's Inferno.

Early in the morning of the 13th we found the rebels had abandoned their
position, and a party of us, while waiting for orders to move, managed
to climb to the top of the mountain. Here we had a splendid view of the
scenery of northern Georgia. Away to the north we could see old Lookout
towering up, while beyond we could distinctly trace Waldron's and other
ridges of the Cumberlands. To the south and west one range of hills
after another, with an occasional mountain, as far as the eye could
reach, showing us that our way was one of difficulty as well as danger.

About two p. m. we fell into line, marched into and through the pass,
and had time to examine the strength of the abandoned rebel works. These
works were evidently constructed with the hope that our commander would
undertake to force the pass. That afternoon we marched through Dalton, a
small village situated near an unbroken forest of pine, a kind from
which the inhabitants make turpentine. The country seemed very poor, and
from what we could see of the inhabitants we were forced to come to the
same conclusion as to them.

The next day, May 14th, we struck the enemy in position at Resaca, and
we immediately charged and drove him inside of his works, while our
brigade occupied the line of a ridge running from near an angle of the
rebel works and within a stone's throw of them. In this charge our young
Colonel Payne, then in command of the regiment, just having returned
recovered from a very dangerous wound received at Chickamauga that
nearly cost him his life, showed consummate bravery, riding his horse in
the charge across an open field in a perfect storm of bullets.

It was nearly dusk when we came into position, and before we took the
ridge that finally formed our line, had some severe fighting. We had the
opportunity of seeing a counter charge against General Willich's brigade
on our right. The rebels came at Willich in fine shape, just as he was
coming into position, but it seemed they had no real good appetite for
an open field fight and got back into their works in the order of "every
one for himself." That night we threw up intrenchments on this line and
the next morning the enemy still confronted us.

We had orders early in the day that we should be required to charge the
enemy's position in our front. In our immediate front there is a deep
ravine, and the rebel works ran across this at right angles to our line.
Whenever we charged from our works our right flank was exposed to the
fire from the rebel intrenchments. At about two p. m. the charge was
ordered and our line moved out over our intrenchments. No sooner was it
exposed to the flank fire from the enemy behind the works than it went
to pieces. Most of the men got back in as good shape as did the rebels
that charged on Willich. Some of our regiment got into a position where
they could not return with any safety, and stayed out and came in under
the cover of darkness. Later in the afternoon the 20th Corps made two or
three attempts to break the rebel line, but each time failing, and when
the morning of the sixteenth dawned the enemy had abandoned his works
and put the little river called Coosa between himself and us.

What good results the battle of Resaca may have had on the campaign I
cannot say, but it is certain the enemy was forced back by some movement
made by General Sherman on his flanks that would compel him to fight
outside of his works. We took a number of prisoners at this position,
and our regiment lost quite severely. We marched through the town and
found it all knocked into splinters by the shelling it had suffered
during the two days' battle. We crossed the river and marched about five
miles to the southward that night.

The experience of one day did not vary much from that of another. The
seventeenth we marched through a county town called Calhoun, county seat
of Gordon county. It was march and skirmish every day. This is a better
country than any other we had seen in northern Georgia, but desolation
was written all over it after we passed. At almost every plantation we
came to the rebels made a stand and the mansion house a fortress from
which to fire at our skirmishers, and when we drove them out the house
almost invariably took fire, and at all times of day and night the
heavens were lurid with the flames of rebel homes. The country from
Resaca to the Etowah river was the most absolutely desolated of any that
we ever left behind us.

Between Cartersville and Adairsville I picked up a muster roll of a
company of an Alabama regiment that had written thereon eighty-four
names. Until I found this roll I was not aware the Roman Catholic church
was so strong in the south. The four commissioned officers signed the
roll by their signatures, but the enlisted men each _put the sign of the
cross_ in the place of the signature. On this march one of the boys
found a copy of the debates of the Georgia convention, held in the
winter of 1860-61, at which the state resolved to go out of the Union.

It contained the speech of Alexander H. Stevens, made in the convention,
in which he warned the delegates of the deluge of blood and fire that
would be poured down on their fair state by the invading armies of the
north. It seemed almost prophetic to us who read this speech in the
light of those blazing southern homes, and it also seemed that we were
the ones he saw in his prophetic vision. Of course, all the prophetic
power he had was the keen intellectual force he possessed, and whether
he believed his own prophesies or not, he was afterward chosen vice
president of the confederate states and served as such during the life
of the rebellion. This book was carried along for days, hoping to save
it as a relic of this memorable campaign, but the time comes in the
experience of every soldier when a pocketknife seems a burden, and this
book, containing all the venom of the southern fire-eaters, couched in
language not only learned and chaste in style, but eloquent in diction,
had to be thrown away. Stevens, alone, tried to stem the tide of
secession, "but it was the voice of a drowning man in the midst of the
breakers."

With marching and skirmishing every day the time wore away, and May 23d
found us on the north bank of the Etowah, a fine river that comes down
from northeastern Georgia, the valley of which seemed very fertile and
productive. This river we crossed on one of Sherman's lightning bridges
and struck out over what is known, locally, as the burnt hickory
district, across the ridges of the Allatoona mountains in the direction
of Dallas. Here Hooker's Corps had a heavy battle, but our corps was not
engaged.

The next position taken by the enemy was known as Dallas, though the
battles along the position were known by different names. I should say
before passing that we were now in what (before the discovery of gold in
California) was known as the gold region of Georgia. Our boys brought in
from time to time, while in this position, some beautiful specimens of
gold bearing and crystallized quartz, but I suppose they had to be
thrown away to lighten the burden of the soldier when the time comes
that one has to give thought and close attention to be able to put one
leg before the other. This seems hardly probable to my young friends
here to-day, so full of health and activity, but how many times have we
heard the dear boys say, "Captain, _I cannot take another step to save
my life_." Often we would pull out of the road and go into camp near
some clear mountain stream, and you would see the boys pulling off their
shoes and stockings and holding their blistered feet in the cool water
by the half-hour, before making any preparations for supper or sleep.
But what pen will ever be able enough, what tongue will be eloquent
enough, to portray the trials and sufferings of the march and
battlefield, to say nothing of sickness, death and wounds.

May 26th our corps found the enemy in position at what was known as
Dallas. That night the rebels attacked General Logan's Corps and were
badly repulsed. This was the only serious night attack I ever knew in
all my army experience. All have known more or less firing at night, but
this was the first and only charging column that I ever knew to be sent
off at night. There seems to be too much uncertainty about it to favor
nocturnal battles.

Early the twenty-seventh we were on the move, my company on the skirmish
line. About ten o'clock we heard that our beloved major, James B.
Hampson, who was on staff duty with General Wood, commanding division,
was killed. This was very sad news, indeed, as the major was idolized by
the regiment, and we all recognized the fact that he had done so much to
make soldiers of us. He was one of the most intelligent, soldierly and
brave officers in the 4th Army Corps. One thing was a little strange,
the major always insisted that he would be killed in the service. Early
in the war the major was a member of the Cleveland Grays, and belonged
to that splendid organization for many years before. He was, without
doubt, the best drilled man in the 3d Division.

It seemed to be the object of General Sherman to put the 4th Corps in on
the left, find the right flank of the enemy, "catch it in air," if
possible, bring on a general engagement, destroy the rebel army, and
thereby end the campaign. It was the fortune of Company B, which I
commanded, to be ordered to the skirmish line, with other portions of
the brigade, and which line in front of our division was in command of
Major Williston, of the 41st O. V. I. Very many times that day we moved
to the front, but always found the enemy in very strong works, and then
we would withdraw and move by the left flank still further to the left.
Late in the afternoon we came near the Pumpkinvine creek, and found the
rebels without works. This fact was immediately reported to division
headquarters. We drove the rebel skirmish line back on his line of
battle. Colonel Payne sent me an order to force the skirmish line well
to the front, and word was sent back that we were fighting the main line
of the enemy, not one hundred feet away. The rebel line was on the top
of a ridge that runs along the valley of the creek, and is naturally a
very strong position. Soon the brigade came up and charged the hill, but
was unable to go beyond our skirmishers. Later on General Howard put in
General Wm. H. Gibson's brigade, the general leading the charge on foot.
Never did I see men show more courage than did Gibson's brigade in this
charge, but all was unavailing. The rebels reinforced their line with
General Pat. Cleburne's division, and thereby far outnumbered the men we
had engaged in the action. Had an entire division been put in between
our left and Pumpkinvine creek mill pond, early in the afternoon, I
believe the result would have been different. As it was a brigade was
fought at a time, on a very short line where the hill was steepest, and
the enemy's position the most unassailable. The result was that our
brigade was the worst cut up of all the battles in which we were
engaged. We fought in this position until dark, and then what was left
of the two brigades, that had been put into this slaughter pen, withdrew
to the other side of the valley. I have said that my company was on the
skirmish line and opened the battle, and fought with the main line when
the same came up. About four o'clock in the afternoon I went over to the
left of the line to see how the battle was progressing in that quarter,
and met Lieutenant Stedman where an old road comes winding down the
hill. I made some inquiry as to how the boys were getting on, and he
told me Adam Waters had been killed. Adam Waters was one of the best men
of our company. He also informed me that a great many others of the
company and regiment were badly wounded. He said: "Captain, we can hold
this position until reinforcements come up, can we not?" I replied, "I
think so, but what we want is to carry this hill." I was facing up the
hill, and he stood with his face toward me, and so near that I could
have laid my hand on his shoulder. All at once a great stream of blood
spouted from his left breast. He gave me one look, as much as to say "my
time has come," and sank in my arms, dead. I moved his body out of the
road, and folded his arms across his breast. I took his watch and
memorandum book, and laid his new and beautiful saber on his body,
marked the tree under which he laid with my knife, so I could find the
spot again, and amid the thunders of battle I left him reposing on the
loving breast of mother earth, while sadly I left for another part of
the field. There on that lone hillside was sacrificed one of the very
few absolutely brave men I ever knew. I moved over to the right of the
line, and there I saw Captain John Irving, sitting up, his body
reclining against the body of a small sapling, smoking his pipe, his
face as white as the driven snow. I said: "Captain are you wounded?"
"Yes, it is all day with me," he replied. I asked him where he was
wounded, he pointed to his right groin. I learned from him that
Lieutenant Colonel Pickands and Captain Wm. Wilson were also wounded.
Captain John Irving died at the hospital at Chattanooga some weeks
afterward. I think the 124th O. V. I. never had a line officer that was
held in higher respect, for his great bravery, soldierly conduct, as
well as social qualities, than Captain John Irving.

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN JOHN B. IRWIN._
]

It was now quite dark, and the firing had ceased all along the line. The
few men that came out of the battle together gathered around Colonel
Payne. He was all alone. His gallant major had been killed early in the
day, and his lieutenant colonel had been dangerously wounded. Of course,
we had hopes that many more would come in during the night, as we were
withdrawn from the field in squads, and without any word of command that
all could hear, and the men were coming in all night.

The night was very dark, and I proposed to Sergeant Orson Vanderhoef of
our company, that if he and two others would volunteer to go with me we
would go over to the hillside and bring off the body of Lieutenant
Stedman. Ort. was made of the best of stuff, and with two others, as
good, we started. Never saw I such a scene before. The old dead pine
trees standing on the ridge had taken fire from the bursting shells and
cast a weird and gloomy light over the battlefield. When we came to the
old road we followed it up and soon came to the tree under which the
body of the dead lieutenant lay. Some one had taken his saber that I so
much wanted to send home to his only child, at that time a small boy,
but we searched in vain for it. I never can forget the terrible sounds
that filled our ears. When the wounded men discovered that some one was
there they began such piteous appeals for help. "For God's sake can't
you give me a drop of water?" "Can't you help me off the field, so I may
not be captured?" The memory of that dread scene haunts me still, and I
suppose will as long as I can turn in fond recollection to those brave
men that were so ruthlessly sacrificed at the battle of New Hope Church.
Would it not be the proper thing for General O. Howard (between his
prayers) to explain why he left that hillside with its great number of
wounded men to fall into the hands of a merciless enemy, when a good
skirmish line could have held it, at least until the wounded could have
been removed? I would not have propounded this inquiry had I not seen
some of his war articles in a popular magazine. But I must return to my
sad story. I said to Sergeant Vanderhoef that he and I would take the
shoulders, and the others might divide the balance of the burden, as
Ort. and I were a little the more muscular of the party. We had just
stooped down to raise the body of our loved comrade when there rang out
the silvery notes of a bugle, so clear and soft one might have mistaken
it for some night bird's call. Ort. said: "Captain, what's that?" I
said: "I guess that is some artillery call. It is certainly not an
infantry call." Ort. said: "By G—d, it's the _rebel forward_, I've heard
it many a time on picket, and we'd better be getting out of here pretty
G—d d—d quick." Just at this instant a rebel skirmisher stepped into the
old road, and the blaze of his musket went away past where we stood. I
whispered to separate instantly, and away we went down the hill. The
firing had now become general all along the line, telling the story only
too plainly that the field, with all of its wealth of dead and wounded
comrades, had been abandoned to the tender mercies of one of the most
cruel enemies that ever fought a battle. Common humanity would have
dictated that a fresh line should have been established on that field,
and maintained there until the last wounded union soldier had been
tenderly borne back to the field hospital. The only reason the rebels
charged over that battlefield that night was because they knew no line
of union skirmishers was there to oppose them, and they could plunder
the brave dead and wounded without danger of molestation.

As soon as one was away from the light of the burning pines it was so
dark one could not see a hand before him, and the first thing that I
realized I was up to my neck in Picket's mill pond; but, being a
Baptist, that did not astonish me to any alarming extent. I groped
around in the darkness not knowing whether my wandering steps were
bearing me into our lines or the rebels'. At length, about three o'clock
a. m., I came upon a group of men and asked who they were. One replied
they were General Howard and staff. I told them my name, rank, company
and regiment, as well as brigade and division, and asked for directions.
None of them could give any and I was about to leave when it occurred to
me that was the corps commandant, and I, as an officer, had a duty to
perform. I addressed the general, begging his pardon for the intrusion,
and told him that I had been driven off the battlefield, and that there
was not so much as a union picket between our lines and the rebels. You
might have supposed that he thanked me for the information, and that he
would have said "that he would have the matter looked into," but on the
contrary his reply was: "There is not a word of truth in your story,
sir. Go away from here, this is my headquarters." I went immediately
away reflecting how it was possible for a man to be such a devout
Christian and a corps commander, and still be so little of a gentleman.

When I found the regiment they were intrenching, and I worked with them
until daylight, when we found our works faced to the rear. We soon put
out a skirmish line, reformed our works, and this battle under the
different names of Picket's Mills, Pumpkinvine creek and New Hope
Church, was the last engagement in which our brigade took part on the
rebel position known as Dallas.

In this battle of New Hope Church, just described in the poor way that a
line officer has of seeing such a conflict, our regiment lost very
heavily in officers and men. I see by a note I made at the time that the
brigade in this action lost five hundred and sixty men. We remained in
this position for a number of days, skirmishing and fighting, somewhere,
almost constantly. It was at this position that we had the benefit of a
lesson and example from the regular brigade. On this line the regulars
joined us on the left. The rebel skirmish line ran along by the edge of
a wood, while from our line to theirs the ground was open and
comparatively level. To avoid losing men, we put our skirmishers out
before daylight in the morning, avoiding any formal "guard mounting,"
and relieved them after dark at night. The regulars took the _regular
regulation way_. At nine o'clock every morning they had "guard
mounting," omitting no formality of the same. The rebel skirmish line,
safe in their pits, firing into them all the time. The new line going
out under fire, and the relieved one coming back under the same
conditions. This occurred every morning as long as we remained in this
position. I am not certain whether this fact ever came to the knowledge
of the general officers or not, but the fact became so notorious that
the men from all along our brigade were in the habit of coming in behind
our works to witness the "_regular guard mounting_." They used to lose
from two to five men every morning. The boys used to call it the
"regular slaughter pen."

We remained in this position until the fifth of June, when we found that
Sherman's flanking process had done its work and the rebels had
abandoned their position, and we moved to the left to within three miles
of Ackworth. From this time until we again struck the rebel position,
the twenty-second of June, it was march, skirmish and intrench. This
gave us but little rest, and the boys were looking haggard and careworn.
This constant skirmishing, this no place of safety, this constant alarm,
and night work on intrenchments, seemed to fatigue and wear out men more
than fighting hard battles, followed by security and rest.

We had now pushed our line as far south as Marietta, a beautiful town,
situated just north of the Chattahoochee river, and just south of
Kennesaw mountain. This country of central Georgia is somewhat peculiar
in its formation. There are no distinct mountain ranges south of the
Allatoonas, but here and there a beautiful little mountain rises all
alone above the surrounding country, that seems very much like table-
land, though not level enough to bear that appellation. Among these
solitary mountains, the names of which I remember, are Pine, where the
rebel general, Bishop Polk, was killed before we reached our present
position, Kennesaw mountain, Lost mountain and Stone mountain. All these
little mountains were taken advantage of, as defensive positions, by the
enemy; and here at Marietta the rebel line ran over the north side of
Kennesaw, making an admirable position for its right flank. Here we
forced our way very close to the enemy's works and in some places our
works approached theirs to within two hundred feet, so that neither army
could have a skirmish line beyond its works. When we were coming into
this close position, the rebels made a charge and were repulsed with
great slaughter; and their dead lay there unburied until after they
abandoned this line. Some of us went over this portion of the line, and
it was with difficulty that we picked our way among the rebel dead. I
never saw the dead lie thicker, save at Chickamauga; and it took a
strong man to stand the terrible stench that arose from that field in
this almost tropical climate. I think this position of the enemy was the
strongest of any we had encountered, and for the benefit of those that
were not there I will describe these rebel works and defenses. In the
first place there was the timber, the trees were felled and the tops
turned outward, the small branches all trimmed off and the large ones
sharpened. These trees, so trimmed, were placed contiguously to each
other, and the buts staked down with heavy stakes driven deep into the
ground. This first line of rebel defenses was about shoulder high to an
ordinary man, and could only be cleared away by axmen. Their second line
was constructed in this wise: A ditch was dug about four feet deep, pine
poles from three to four inches in diameter were cut and sharpened to a
point, set about four inches apart at an angle of about forty-five
degrees, facing outward, and coming up about breast high. This ditch was
filled with earth, and tamped solidly, then near the ground these
sharpened stakes were woven together with withes. A more formidable
defense could hardly be invented. Their third line of defense required
more labor. They cut pine logs about twelve inches in diameter, and
bored them through the center at right angles, with three inch augers;
these holes were filled with pine poles six feet long sharpened at each
end, and driven through the log just halfway. These logs were halved
together and pinned, and the splices wrapped with telegraph wire, thus
making a continuous line. This defense is what the French call
_Chevauxdefrise_, and is just as formidable one side up as the other,
and cannot be gotten over without axmen. Finally, the rifle pits, with
head-logs thereon, leaving a space of about three inches, through which
an infantryman could aim and fire in comparative safety, the head-logs
fully protecting the head above the line of sight. These defenses were
placed and constructed about fifteen rods apart, and all within the
deadly range of the Enfield rifle with which our mother country had
armed the confederacy; and a more accurate, longer range muzzle-loader
was never invented. A portion of the enemy's line, with defenses just as
I have described above, General Sherman tried to carry by assault the
twenty-seventh day of June, and lost three thousand men in fifteen
minutes, General Newton making the assault with the first division of
the 4th corps. Our brigade was in position to support the assaulting
columns and we saw the disastrous charge, but the charge failing we were
not put in. Here the brave young General Harker was killed, while
leading one of the assaulting columns. That the charge would fail was
inevitable. A single line of battle of the enemy, armed as they were,
inside of such defenses, could repulse any mass of men that could be
sent against them. It would require a man without a musket and
accouterments, armed with a good ax, from five to ten minutes to cut
through these three outer lines of defenses, and the idea of assaulting
such a position without first having these defenses cleared away, was
entirely preposterous. It would have cost the killing or wounding of one
thousand axmen to have cleared the way for a regimental front to charge.
After the terrible disaster of the twenty-seventh of June, 1864, General
Sherman came out in a long general order, which was in fact a very weak
excuse for this disastrous blunder, and winding up in substance as
follows: "My soldiers must learn that they must charge in all places,
and that we cannot depend at all times upon flank movements."

I suffer no man, no old soldier, to stand before me in my admiration for
the services rendered our country by that grand old hero, General W. T.
Sherman, but in military life, like civil life, a man may be very
valuable and great in one direction, and of very little value in
another. That general was not developed during the war for the
suppression of the rebellion, that could handle one hundred thousand men
in such a fine manner, keeping them all in hand, like General Sherman.
But when it came to fighting in a country the Atlanta campaign was
fought over, with the defenses his army had to meet, his corps
commanders, and his men generally, had very little confidence in his
judgment. This feeling, that he knew was quite general, was the
inspiration of the famous order that I have referred to before, issued
after the battle of Kennesaw mountain, June 27th, 1864. I have it on the
authority of Colonel Payne, that Generals Thomas, Logan, McPherson and
others of his generals on the campaign, persuaded him out of many an
assault he had ordered, that would have been as disastrous as that of
Kennesaw mountain. But that any of them had the ability to do as well as
he did I do not believe. General Thomas had the best of judgment in
fighting a battle and what men could do and should attempt, but he would
never have gotten his army there as Sherman did. Of course General
Sherman never _admitted_ his mistake in ordering the assault at
Kennesaw, but we all remember he never _repeated_ it during the
remainder of the campaign.

In the position in front of Kennesaw we saw trees twelve inches in
diameter cut completely off by the fire of musketry alone—simply bitten
out, piece by piece, until the trees would fall. You can imagine about
how much ammunition was expended?

On the third of July we found the rebels had again retired, and we
followed up, passing through Marietta. We made a short stop near the
Georgia State Military Institute. Some of us went up on one of the
buildings and had a fine view of the surrounding country. We marched in
all to the southward six miles this day, and turned in to get ready to
celebrate the glorious fourth, to-morrow. The morning of the fourth
opened with more than a national salute, and though we did not do much
fighting there was plenty of cannonading on our right, and it was
currently reported in camp that fifteen hundred prisoners had been
captured, which caused "the day we celebrate" to be indeed a glorious
fourth. The fifth we found the rebels had again abandoned their works in
our front, and our regiment deployed as skirmishers, and held the
advance of the division. We found, on the top of the hill that overlooks
the Chattahoochee river, a "_butternut_" that had evidently tired of the
southern confederacy, for, as Hood puts it, had "enlisted in the line."
He had bent down a sapling, fastened a piece of bark around "his
melancholy neck" and to the sapling, and then let go. He was one of
those lank, lean rebels that had not flesh enough on his bones to even
decay. He had dried up like a piece of beef, and was an elegant specimen
of a confederate mummy. This item of news in time of peace would,
undoubtedly, have furnished a sensational article for a Marietta paper,
but the boys cut him down and the line moved on.

In the afternoon, as we approached the river, from the top of a high
hill we saw Atlanta. It looked as good to us as the promised land did to
Moses, as there we saw the end of this terribly exacting and fatiguing
campaign. As we were driving the rebels down to the river, at the south
side of an open field, the rebels erected rail barricades, from which it
gave us some trouble to dislodge them. I thought by swinging the left of
our line around we could "gobble them in," and not expose our center to
their fire, protected as they were, and had sent word to that effect to
Captain Raidaie, who had charge of that portion of the line. About this
time General Tommy Wood, commander of our division, rode up, accompanied
by one orderly. Without waiting for me to carry out my little strategy,
or in fact consulting me at all, he at once ordered a charge. "Go in,
brave boys." "Go in, brave boys." We, of course, drove the Johnnies from
their rail barricade with the most perfect safety, as they put in all
the time we were "double quicking" across the field, shooting at "Old
Tommy;" fortunately the old general was in such a state of _spiritual
exhilaration_ that he was in no danger of getting hurt. That night we
drove the last rebel across the Chattahoochee river, and went into camp
for several days.

We had been on the campaign sixty-three days. The enemy had been flanked
out of four very strong positions, but nothing like a general engagement
had been fought, nothing like a decisive battle had been won. Owing to
the fact that where battles had been fought the enemy fought behind his
works, on very advantageous ground, our losses must have been very much
more severe than his. Our base of supplies was every day growing farther
away, and our line of communications therewith requiring more men to
guard. With the exception of the fact that we had run over some rebel
territory, that we left in a condition to feed no more rebels, what had
we gained.

The enemy during all these long weeks had been commanded by General
Joseph E. Johnston. Of all the defensive officers, developed by the war
on either side, I do not believe General Joseph E. Johnston had an
equal. In the face of a vastly superior army, he had held four
positions, fought many battles, and finally crossed the Chattahoochee
river, and General Sherman had not been able to force him into a
decisive engagement.

In all this defensive retreat General Johnston had not lost property to
the value of a cracker box. While the country we had so far advanced
over had been most favorable to a defensive campaign, nevertheless, I
doubt if the history of the world can furnish another example of so well
executed defensive work, as that conducted by General Joseph E.
Johnston, from Ringgold to the Chattahoochee river. But fortunately for
the right treason is not always associated with great ability. If the
civil administration of the confederacy had been conducted as ably as
the military, with all of its mistakes and blunders, the outcome would
have been a matter of grave doubt. But fortunately for the Union and the
cause of humanity, Mr. Jefferson Davis, the president of the
confederacy, had not the ability to appreciate the services of one so
able as the general that had so successfully opposed General Sherman on
the Atlanta campaign. Generals Johnston and Sherman were both educated
at our military academy at West Point, and were classmates. Each knew
the other very well; and it was the plan of General Johnston, knowing
the impetuosity of General Sherman, to destroy the union army by
suffering it to continually give him battle behind his impregnable
works, and from which continual mistakes General Sherman's able
lieutenants had saved him (to which I have referred heretofore). General
Johnston well knew, from the start, that he could not cope with the
union army in an open field engagement, and he had planned to have so
reduced Sherman's army, by the time he had reached and crossed the
Chattahoochee river, that the two armies would be on something like
equal terms as to men, and a more aggressive mode of warfare on the part
of the rebel forces would give better promise of success. But after the
confederate army had crossed the Chattahoochee river, the civil
authorities at Richmond became alarmed. The president of the confederacy
being the inspiration of the dissatisfaction that existed against
General Sherman's heroic opponent, General Johnston was removed and
General Hood placed in command of the rebel forces, and the sequel will
show with what success. Had General Johnston been supported by the civil
authorities at Richmond, as the good (or bad rather) of the confederate
cause demanded, in my humble judgment, the music and sentiment of
"Marching through Georgia," that so much amused the grand old general in
his declining years, would never have been written. But I must stop this
generalizing and return to the details of my narrative.

July 10th, 1864, again found us on the march to the left, and we moved
in that direction about seven miles to near the headquarters of the 23d
Corps, and on the twelfth, again struck tents, and moved down to the
river, crossing the same on a canvas-boat pontoon bridge, and went into
camp much nearer Atlanta than ever before. The next day we were again on
the move, but only made a short distance and went into camp, and
remained in camp until the seventeenth, when our brigade went to the
river above, drove the Johnnies away, and saw one of General Sherman's
pontoon companies put a bridge across the Chattahoochee river in just
one hour and a quarter, and the 14th Army Corps commenced crossing. The
next day we broke camp and started in the direction of Atlanta, General
Newton's division taking the lead. We found nothing but skirmishers
before us, who seemed entirely willing to fall back as fast as we came
on. The next day, the nineteenth, we moved up to Peach Tree creek, and
we found that a different commander was in charge of the rebels, for
they attacked the 20th Corps with great spirit. But it did not seem to
take the heroes of Lookout mountain long in an open field fight to do
the Johnnies, as they seemed to be very glad to get away from them. This
battle of Peach Tree creek was the first of Hood's battles, and in this
he was very badly punished. Our regiment was not engaged more than in
heavy skirmishing, but our captain, Sherburn B. Eaton, was badly, and in
fact very dangerously, wounded. He was serving on staff duty at division
headquarters at the time. The captain recovered from his wound, but not
sufficiently to permit of his returning to the service. Captain Eaton
was our first adjutant, and was as prompt an one as ever read orders on
dress parade. He was a very scholarly gentleman, and from him we learned
much; and if I remember correctly he learned some things from us. Some
of us country boys, on the start, thought our adjutant a little stylish;
but we found him brave in action, and that, like charity, covers a
multitude of other seeming defects in a soldier.

General Sam. Beatty's brigade of our division captured a large number of
men, and among them a number of officers. Though the burden of the
battle of Peach Tree creek fell on Hooker's Corps, many other
organizations bore quite important parts in the same. On the whole, we
were all highly pleased with the change in the rebel commanders, and
hoped he would keep up his present tactics. This open-field-battle
business was just what we wanted, and had been praying for all summer,
and only hoped Corporal Hood would indulge in them to excess.

On the twentieth of July we marched to the left, our division supporting
the first division to within three miles of Decatur, and within four
miles of Atlanta. Very heavy skirmishing in front, and McPherson
reported within two miles of Atlanta. Hood charged Newton's division and
Hooker's Corps, and was repulsed with great loss.

The twenty-first we broke camp very early, moved to the right, crossed
the Peach Tree creek, moved to the front, and put up good works.

Early the morning of the twenty-second Hardee's Corps moved back to the
east of Decatur, and struck McPherson's Corps on the left flank and
rear, completely turning the same. The gallant general was killed at the
front where he was trying to rearrange his line of battle, exposing
himself to the enemy's sharpshooters. We all felt that all the brave
general could have accomplished by his exposure was very poor recompense
for the grand life thus sacrificed. Everything seemed to promise victory
for the rebels until they had swept our line as far as the 15th Corps,
when they found that Logan had changed his front to rear, and instead of
there being anything like panic or confusion, they were met by a charge,
led in person by that gallant general, that sent them whirling back to
the place from which they started, leaving Logan in possession of the
field. We were moved over to the left to the support of the 15th Corps,
but were not put into the action; and I think could not have been
without being mounted, such was the fury of Logan's charge. This was the
third of Corporal Hood's battles before Atlanta, each one of which had
resulted in defeat and great disaster. But our loss was terribly severe,
as we lost one of our best corps commanders, which cast a gloom over the
entire army. General James McPherson was not only loved by the army of
the Tennessee, but was admired by all the men and officers that were so
fortunate as to have formed his acquaintance.

The twenty-second we advanced our lines nearer the city and threw up
very heavy intrenchments, and the next day strengthened them and put up
a line of abatis in front. Our batteries spent their time in throwing
shells into the city. I should say our skirmish line was out a mile from
the ridge occupied by our works. We remained in this position for a
number of days, and on the twenty-seventh moved out and marched around a
hill to the left, seemingly a thousand and one times, to make the rebels
believe we were moving to the left; but I guess we did not fool them
much, as I never saw that anything ever came out of our demonstration.

On this position, at the left of our regiment and company, there was a
battery of ten pound Rodman guns posted. These guns were rifled and were
capable of throwing a shell five miles, they made us believe at least,
and they spent their time throwing shells into Atlanta. Once every five
minutes they dropped a shell into the city, which must have rendered it
a very unpleasant place for a summer resort. The strangest thing about
this whole business is, that we could lie down and go to sleep "in our
little beds," and not hear those five minute guns _once_ all night long.
Such is the power of habit.

At this position we received news that Sergeant Japhet Sooy had died at
Chattanooga the sixteenth of July. Sergeant Sooy was one of the best of
soldiers, and his great mirthfulness not only made him a great favorite
with his own company, but with the entire regiment. All knew him to be
brave and kind, as well as faithful and obedient. We also received word
that Timothy Powers was buried at Chattanooga the twenty-eighth of July.

The news of these sad losses caused us to reflect on the condition of
Company B that left Cleveland, Ohio, with one hundred strong and able-
bodied men. Now twenty-five of them were under the ground, filling
honorable, but many of them unknown, graves. I have not the record now
before me, but I am certain that the other nine companies of this
fighting regiment suffered equally as severe losses.

On the third of August the skirmish line in the front of our brigade
left their pits, drove the rebel skirmish line back, and captured thirty
of the Johnnies; and so persistently did our fellows hold the advanced
position by them taken, that the rebels had to bring up a line of battle
before they could restore their skirmish line. In this affair our
regiment did not lose a man. This little action came about by our
general officers thinking there were no rebels but a skirmish line in
our front, and there was nothing to hinder us from going to Atlanta; but
they soon found out there were plenty of those selfsame rebels between
our line and the city we sought. We remained in this position a long
time, doing more camp than field duty. General Sherman brought up a
number of heavy siege guns from the rear and planted them to our right,
and threw one hundred pounds of iron into the city at every discharge.
What good this bombardment did I cannot now tell, save the destruction
of a rebel city, which I have now come to regard as the right thing to
do under the circumstances, and should have been commenced sooner.
Somehow rebel cities seemed to suffer wherever General Sherman went, for
which I entertain for his memory the profoundest respect.

While at Atlanta we lost the 9th Ind. from our brigade. Colonel Campbell
had orders to report to Indianapolis for muster-out. We were sorry to
part with the 9th as they were in every respect a first-class regiment,
and could be always depended upon to take care of their part of the
line. But they were now going home, after serving since 1861, having
done their full share of service for their country.

August 26th, at about eight o'clock a. m., we commenced the movement to
the right. This was the most terribly hot weather we had encountered; we
marched not over eight miles, but more than half of our regiment fell
out, completely overcome by the intense heat. That night our regiment
was ordered on the skirmish line. The next day the regiment was ordered
to move to the right, and marched about four miles. The next day the
14th Corps and its train passed us, and the general tendency of the army
seemed to be to the right. The next day we struck what we called the
Montgomery railroad. We destroyed about a mile of it pretty effectually.
We turned the road over, built large fires, put in the rails, heated
them hot, and then twisted them around trees and stumps. I have since
thought of what sort of language the section-boss used, when he was sent
to repair that track. I wonder if what we did that day made the
confessional more expensive for him.

August 30th we moved out early, to a position near where we had been
wrecking railroad; then marched in a southeasterly course to within four
miles of the Macon railroad, as we called it at the time. We were
offered very little resistance from the enemy, and this day we marched
about ten miles. We were making the grand flank movement around Atlanta,
so famous in history. On the last day of August we moved out from camp
to a position on a ridge, and commenced putting up works. Plenty of
enemy in our front. About eleven o'clock a. m. the rebels left their
works, and we immediately started in pursuit. The 1st division took some
prisoners. We struck the Macon railroad about four o'clock p. m. We saw
a train pass over the road just as we came up. We selected a position
and fortified it, and a detail destroyed the track. The next morning,
our brigade being in the rear, we moved out late and marched down the
railroad toward Jonesborough. Heavy cannonading at the front, and we
learned that the regular brigade had made an assault on the enemy's
position and had been repulsed; but we were also informed that General
Mitchell's brigade had renewed the assault, drove the rebels from their
works, captured a six gun battery and two thousand prisoners.

On the second day of September, 1864, we moved out early, marched
through Jonesborough, and found the enemy in position about three miles
south of town on the railroad. We formed in line of battle, and made an
attack on both his flanks, but failed, for some reason, to pass beyond
them. Here we learned that Atlanta had fallen and was in our possession,
and the rejoicing along our line was immense. The news was soon
confirmed by a circular from division headquarters, stating that the
rebels had blown up two of their trains of ammunition and seven siege
guns. This accounted for the noise, that sounded more like an explosion
than a battle, that we had heard the night before. For some reason
entirely unknown to your humble servant, General Sherman did not desire
to pursue Corporal Hood any further south, and our line of battle was
withdrawn. So Atlanta had fallen after a campaign of one hundred and
twenty-two days. The distance from Chattanooga to Atlanta by the
railroad is one hundred and thirty-eight miles, but we had marched,
undoubtedly, more than that distance by a great many miles, in the flank
movements we had made.

On the eighth day of September, 1864, we marched into and through the
"gate city of the south." We put on all the style of which our dirty and
ragged condition would permit, forming our regiments in column by
company, with our bands playing and colors flying. We marched down
Marietta street, and the few citizens we saw did not lay themselves out
to give us a cordial welcome. This street was the nearest _ruins_ of
anything west of the Atlantic. We saw one large sign that I suppose the
visitor could hardly find in the new Atlanta. It extended the entire
front of a block and read: "Slaves At Auction." We marched three miles
east of town and went into camp, and the Atlanta campaign was ended.

I have tried to give you, though very imperfectly, my recollections of
this, the greatest campaign ever made on the western continent. To the
general hearer it would have been more interesting, without doubt, to
have given the outlines of the campaign, omitting the details of each
day's movements with their dates; but as many of that old fighting
regiment (of which I had the honor of being a member) are still alive, I
thought it my duty to place upon record a detailed account of their
sufferings and triumphs. General Sherman had, indeed, broken the shell
of the confederacy; but I must say (and I think my comrades will agree
with me) it was, by all odds, the _toughest shell_ we ever helped to
crack.

For more than one hundred days, of the one hundred and twenty-two days
of the Atlanta campaign, we had been under fire. The graves of our dear
dead comrades are scattered thickly from Dalton to Jonesborough.

The red earth of our intrenchments marks the hillsides and beautiful
mountains of northern and central Georgia.

The campaign was the severest blow the rebellion had received up to that
time, and from Atlanta, General Sherman commenced his grand march to the
sea.




                       FROM ATLANTA TO NASHVILLE.


The campaign of Atlanta practically closed with the abandonment of the
city by the rebels, September 2d, 1864. The confederate forces still
occupied a position near Jonesborough, about thirty miles south of
Atlanta. The campaign had ended by the federal forces arriving at a
certain geographical point. The confederate forces, although somewhat
shattered and reduced by the battles dating from Peach Tree creek
forward, were still intact. The rebel forces were still in command of
Hood; and with him were some able fighting officers, in the persons of
Cleburne, Hill, Hardee, Adams and others.

On our arrival at Atlanta, General Sherman immediately commenced
preparations for the grand march to the sea. It was at once evident that
he intended to abandon his line of communications, for he commenced to
build a fort large enough for the garrison he intended to leave at
Atlanta. This fort he built substantially in the heart of the city, and
destroyed the balance because in the way of the fort. So when General
Sherman took up his world-renowned march for the seaboard, but very
little of the "gate city of the south" remained standing. While these
preparations were going forward the 124th regiment was in camp about
three miles southeast of Atlanta, busy in cleaning up, drawing new
clothing, and recuperating from the effects of the arduous campaign just
closed. We had not been in camp many days before we were astonished by
the news that the Sanitary Commission, a patriotic organization of the
loyal citizens of the north (whose ramifications penetrated to every
city, village, hamlet and farm of the loyal states), had sent us a train
load of Irish potatoes. This may seem a small matter to take note of
after so many years and read to you, who in all your lives have never
know the want of anything to eat your appetites might crave, but what do
you say of a lot of men that from January 1st, 1863, to September, 1864,
had not feasted, even their eyes, on a potato? If you could, at your
home, surrounded with all the delicacies of the culinary art, be
deprived of the common potato for eighteen months, you could then
appreciate our situation. The cheers and shouting that went up, mid-
afternoon, when the commissary department sent word to the regiments it
had potatoes to issue, were enough to make one think the news of some
great victory had been communicated to us. And when the stream of
potatoes began to be diverted and divided to the companies and messes,
it was too comical for anything, those great bronzed and weather-beaten
soldiers, running around with their hands full of potatoes, and to see
the fires lighted at that time of day, and the little kettles, or pails
rather, filled and put on brimming full of potatoes; then when cooled to
see the feasting—potatoes served with salt. I suppose you would demand
nice Jersey butter, but salt was good enough for us. And this is not all
I have to say of that commission organized from the loyal citizens of
the north. It brought us by the car load, pickled cabbage and onions;
and how refreshing they were to us that had not tasted vegetable food
for eighteen long months. I do not believe there is an old veteran alive
to-day that does not bless from the bottom of his heart, that greatest
and most magnificent of charities ever organized—the Sanitary
Commission.

We had stayed in camp, as I said, while General Sherman was preparing
for his march to the sea; busy each day with drilling, foraging for
corn, and all the many things necessary to keep companies and regiments
in good shape, as per the army regulations. We had hoped, as had each
regiment of the Army of the Cumberland, that it would be our good
fortune to go with Sherman on his march south, and it was with not a
little chagrin and heartburning that we were not called, neither chosen,
to go on that march, that has been the wonder and admiration of the
military critics of all nations.

It had been determined by General Sherman that our corps (the 4th),
commanded by General Stanley, and the 23d Corps, commanded by General
Schofield—these two corps, and all other organizations of troops between
Atlanta and Nashville, to be in command of General George H. Thomas.
Howard was placed in command of the army of the Tennessee, whereby we
lost the services of General Hooker. The remainder of the army (save the
brigade of regulars, that were sent back to the top of Lookout mountain
where they would be out of danger) was chosen by General Sherman to make
the march to the sea. But you must not suppose that this choice was made
by reason of any superiority of that portion of the army that went with
him. It had turned out that Corporal Hood had made up his mind that if
Sherman could cut away from his base of supplies, and march south into
the enemy's country, he (Hood) ought to be able to march north, among
his dearly beloved friends; and if Sherman struck a heavy blow south, he
would get in his counter up north. And with the 23d and 4th Corps only,
left by Sherman, Hood had two men to Thomas' one.

But before passing to the details of the campaign upon which we were
about to enter, suffer me to remark that the same painstaking
preparation by General Sherman that I referred to in the "Atlanta
Campaign," was going forward. The most rigid surgical examination was
had in every company of every man whose health was suspected, or where
there could be anything found that incapacitated him from performing the
supposed arduous duties to be imposed upon him. All that could not stand
this rigid test were sent north. Would you not suppose that many would
have taken advantage of this examination to have gotten rid of a
campaign that seemed fraught with dangers, and so difficult of
execution? On the contrary, I am informed by high authority that those
that were rejected felt themselves grossly insulted and degraded as
soldiers. Neither was this crucial examination confined to the men—the
animals were carefully inspected, and all those not perfectly sound were
sent to the rear, or disposed of in some other way. The same of arms and
accouterments; so that when General Sherman turned his face toward the
salt sea breezes of the Atlantic, he had under his command as hardy, as
healthy, as determined, and as brave an army of veterans as ever caused
the earth to tremble under their tread.

It now seemed that Hood wanted a little more of the smell of our powder
before he took his little excursion to the mountains of Tennessee, for
we heard he was in force north of Marietta, and was threatening one of
our fortified positions at Altoona Pass, that Sherman had used as a sub-
base of supplies during the Atlanta campaign. So October 3d, 1864, we
broke up camp and marched to within five miles of Marietta, and camped
in the rebel works that had been constructed by them, first, after
leaving their position at Kennesaw mountain. This was good marching,
having started from our camp, three miles east of Atlanta, at four
o'clock p. m.

The fourth, we struck tents at noon and marched through Marietta to the
front of Kennesaw, and again found the rebel works convenient. Plenty of
rebels reported at Big Shanty, a short distance north. This two days'
marching shows how much easier to retrograde than to advance, in the
face of the enemy. It had taken us to go from Kennesaw mountain to
Atlanta, from July 22d to September 2d, and we had returned in a part of
two days. The fifth we moved out of our camp and marched north to Piny
Knob, and formed in line of battle along the base of the mountain.
Sherman had a signal corps or station on the top of this mountain. Some
of us went up to the station, and we could distinctly see Altoona Pass,
and see the smoke of the battle in progress there, as well as watch the
advancing columns General Sherman was sending forward for the relief of
General Corse, who was gallantly defending the works there, against
overpowering numbers of the enemy. It was here, from this mountain top,
that General Sherman signaled to General Corse "Hold the fort for I am
coming," that some one has immortalized in sacred song. Several of the
old 124th stood not twenty feet from the old general, when this famous
dispatch was being signaled from the top of Piny Knob to the gallant
Corse, who at that time was suffering from a dangerous wound he received
while in the defense he was making. But Hood, evidently, did not care to
fight on equal terms, and withdrew in the direction of Lost mountain,
and afterwards moved in the direction of Rome, Ga.; and Sherman, leaving
Old Pap Thomas to look after and care for Corporal Hood, turned his face
toward the south, and that was the last day of the war we ever saw our
beloved Uncle Billy. It was with a feeling of sadness that we saw him
depart, for we had learned to love and trust in him as we had no other
commander. We marched north through Altoona Pass, which still showed
evidences of the sanguinary conflict that had taken place there. We
marched all night after we went through the Pass, sleeping fifteen
minutes each hour. It was perfectly surprising to see how quickly the
regiment would go to sleep when the halt was sounded. When the assembly
call came it was some trouble to wake the tired soldiers, but usually we
were soon all in line, and marching on for another hour. The next day we
marched all day long, after halting, making coffee, and taking breakfast
near the Etowah river. On this march I first discovered the fact that it
was possible for one to march and be sound asleep, for on waking up I
discovered that no portion of the landscape had a familiar look, showing
that one had been asleep long enough for the landscape to entirely
change by our moving forward. This marching back on the railroad track
was very hard, as the road was not in very good shape, and we were in
danger of falling through trestles; and during the night, every now and
then, some sleepy soldier would get off his guard, and his head would go
down on the rail, making everything jingle. All the sympathy such
unfortunates received would be the shouts and jeers of his comrades to
which he often replied in language _just bordering on the profane_. This
marching did not differ much from day to day, and on the fifteenth day
of October we crossed the Rocky Face mountains. We went out over the
Chickamauga battlefield and saw very many of the bones of our unknown
comrades still unburied, that had fallen there more than a year before.

What strange feelings come over one as he passes over the field where he
fought, and his loved comrades fell. It seems as though they were with
him again in all of their manly beauty; he can see their stern looks of
defiance; can hear the rattle of the musketry, the thunder of the
artillery, the shouts of victory, the thud of the fatal minie, the dying
groan, the last good-bye; and the specter battle seems as real as when
engaged in the deadly conflict of the year before. The timber was badly
torn down by the shot and shells on that portion of the field over which
we passed. I remember the last day our Colonel Payne was with us. The
regiment was marching left in front that day, and of course that brought
my company next to the colonel and his staff. We made a halt near
Rossville, and laid down on the grass to rest. It was a beautiful Indian
summer evening; and while in conversation with the colonel he informed
me he intended to leave the regiment at Chattanooga; "thought he had
done his part," which was true, having nearly lost his life from a wound
he received at Chickamauga. I was surprised to learn of his intention to
leave us, as this was the first intimation that I had of his intention
to resign; but what surprised me most was the despairing view he seemed
to take of the war. He said to me, "We never can conquer the south, and
if we do children yet unborn will fight in this war." I replied: "They
would have to muster them in pretty young, if they did, and I expect to
see the end of the rebellion the next year." I think it must have been
the depressing effect of our retrograde movement that had taken such a
hold on our brave young colonel, for it did seem to many that all our
arduous campaign to Atlanta had been for naught.

Many thought it presumptuous in General Sherman to leave a large rebel
army to be opposed by an army of about half its numbers. But General
Sherman knew him that was in command of the rebel army, and knew very
well the grand old Virginian he had intrusted with the taking care of
him. We went into camp around Chattanooga, the place that had been the
scene of so much of sorrow and rejoicing the year before. We soon heard
that Hood was marching for the Tennessee river about Decatur, and we
were put into and on freight cars, and started in the night for that
point.

A large part of my company was on the top of the cars, and many of them
went to sleep in that dangerous situation and caused me very much
anxiety. Many a time during that night of peril I found a comrade just
on the edge of the car, liable to fall off with any little jolt. I never
remember passing a more perilous night. The next day we "came off the
roof" of the cars, and soon commenced the march northward for Pulaski.

When we came to the Duck river, that we had crossed the year before at
Manchester, there a mere mountain stream, we found a considerable river,
and so swollen with rains that it gave us considerable difficulty in
crossing. We soon arrived at Pulaski, a beautiful little village in
middle Tennessee. This is the best portion of the state, and so much has
nature done for it, that had it not been for the blighting influence of
slavery, might have truthfully been denominated the garden spot of the
United States. We had not been in Pulaski many days before Forrest's
cavalry appeared on our flanks, and we heard that Hood had crossed the
Tennessee river. We now took the pike again and moved up as far as the
village of Columbia, the home of several distinguished officers of the
confederate army. Here we went into camp, and did considerable
intrenching, our flanks resting on the Elk river. We arrived at Columbia
the twenty-fourth of October, and remained there until the night of the
twenty-ninth. During the day of the twenty-ninth our regiment was sent
up the river to watch a ford, and we watched it nicely, seeing the rebel
infantry crossing all day; but we had no orders to do anything but
watch. That afternoon we heard heavy firing in the direction of Spring
Hill, and we afterwards learned that our first division had been sharply
engaged with Cheatham's division, and had most handsomely checked the
rebel advance. At dark we were called in, and commenced the march
northward again. I should say it was about midnight when Adjutant Hammer
came riding back directing the company commandants to have the men so
adjust their canteens and bayonet scabbards that as little noise be made
as possible, that we were in the immediate presence of the enemy. This
we could hardly believe. Were it possible that the rebels had gotten a
position cutting our army in twain? We believed nothing of the kind,
but, nevertheless, obeyed the order like the true veteran soldiers that
we were. Soon we saw two lines of fires running away to the northeast,
and the left end of the line nearest us was so near the pike one could
have cast a stone into it without much effort. Were it possible these
two lines of bivouac fires represented the two lines of blue and gray
that had been fighting there the afternoon before? It was true. Such
were the facts. And yet our division, the 3d, and a wagon train twelve
miles long, passed along that pike, with all the noise incident to the
moving of a wagon train and artillery attached to our division, without
hindrance or molestation from the enemy.

Not a shot was fired, not a rebel picket nor skirmish line encountered,
as we passed the left flank of the enemy's line. Yet, they knew we were
there, for several of our men wandered from the column and went over to
the fires to warm, and were captured. Was there treason to the
confederacy? The fighting the next day fully answers that question in
the negative. Hood claims, I am told, that his officers were drunk and
failed to attack as he had ordered, and thereby let our division pass
him at Spring Hill. This may be true, for middle Tennessee makes a kind
of whiskey that will take the W. C. T. U. a long time to eradicate. A
single skirmish line across the pike that night would have so delayed
us, incumbered with the train, as we were (the train could not have been
moved off the pike), that it hardly seems possible that General Stanley
could have reunited the divisions of his corps. Thus was the golden
opportunity of Hood lost. We soon left the rebel fires behind us, and
with our train well ahead, and our divisions united, we had little to
fear from an army commanded by such a general as Hood. I have read
somewhere a confederate account of this transaction, and the writer,
though claiming to have been on the spot, fails to give anything like a
rational reason for the confederate forces letting us pass them October
30th, at Spring Hill.

The next morning we halted and made coffee beside the pike. While
breakfasting, a squad of rebel cavalry dashed up to the train, fired a
few shots, and were away like the wind. As we neared Franklin we came up
with some new regiments that General Thomas had hurried on from
Nashville, to meet and assist us in case we were forced to a battle
before we reached Nashville. These poor fellows that had been as far
south as Spring Hill, and were returning that morning, were mostly
completely played out, and filled the fence corners all along the pike.
I am sorry to say the hardy veterans that swung along after marching all
night treated them to expressions of which the following are samples:
"Fresh fish." "Fresh fish." "There lies $1000 and a cow." "How much did
you get?" "Say Jimmy, who owns you?" "Millions in it." These poor
fellows, with knapsacks larger than a mule should be required to carry,
received these taunts and jeers with silent disgust; and quite likely
the most of them at this time are drawing pensions for disabilities
received in the service and in the line of duty, while the old veteran
of scores of battles and skirmishes, of hundreds of miles of marches,
though broken in health, and prematurely old by reason of his hard
service, _has no hospital record_, and suffers great difficulties in
establishing his claim for a pension. Something wrong, somewhere, sure.

We arrived at Franklin about noon, and found the 23d Corps in position
and throwing up works from the Harpeth river above the village to the
river below. With this place we were very familiar. We first came here
in February, 1863. This was our camp of instruction. We assisted in
building the fort, with its large magazine on the north side of the
river and to the left of the village facing south. We that had worked
out many a weary detail asking, "What is all this worth?" "What is this
for, miles—miles from the enemy and the front," had the opportunity,
this thirtieth day of October, 1864, of seeing our labor richly
rewarded. We use to do picket duty north of the river and town, and knew
every foot of that country; and our Lieutenant Colonel Pickands and
Adjutant Hammer enjoyed the reputation of knowing some of the rebel
girls, with which the village swarmed. I remembered one Sally Atkinson,
who lived near our picket line, in fact the line ran through her
father's dooryard, who was a fine player on the piano, and something of
a singer. She, like all the southern women, was a bitter rebel, and used
to entertain the boys with "The bonny blue flag," and other rebel songs.
She often boasted of having two brothers in the rebel service. But more
of this anon.

Our wagon train was on the north side of the river, pulling out for
Nashville to the full extent of its mule power. Those not familiar may
be interested in a brief description of the field where the battle of
Franklin was fought. The Harpeth river makes quite a sharp bend to the
north, and the formerly very rich village, built very compactly,
occupies the most of the room in the bend. Here, before the war, was the
home of many rich cotton planters, for as you all will remember, this is
the heart of the cotton growing belt of Tennessee. The turnpike running
from the southern part of the state, through Pulaski, Columbia, and on
to Nashville, ran through about the center of Franklin. The Harpeth
river is a small stream, made largely of springs, but running through a
limestone region, lay in deep pools much of its way, that only rendered
it fordable above and below the town. To the left of the pike going
south from town there was a large cotton field, stretching to the left,
nearly to the river, and extending to the south, I should say, from half
to three-quarters of a mile to a line of hills, that rise quite abruptly
and constitute a picturesque landscape. Across this cotton field, from
east to west, ran our works, as I have said, from river above to river
below. At and near the pike, and to the left of the same, was planted
all of the field artillery that we possessed. It was the fortune of our
regiment to be detailed to cross the river, go down below the pike
bridge, intrench the south bank and guard the ford; and while we
witnessed the battle we were not called into it, and did not have
occasion to fire a shot at the point where we were stationed. Our line,
as you will understand from this brief description, was of necessity
short, and in some places was supported by a reserve line. General Hood
came up with his forces and formed his charging columns under the cover
of the hills at the south. He visited each division and brigade, to
which he stated that all the confederate soldiers had to do was to take
the rude works in front of Franklin, Thomas' army would be captured, and
Nashville with all of its vast military stores of clothing, provisions
and ammunition would fall into their hands. That Hood was a good man to
fight, about a division, I think is conceded; but I take it, if Thomas
had been consulted, and could have had the directing of Hood, he would
not have had him done any different from what he did. Hood had in all
arms, about forty-five thousand men when he came before Franklin. He had
about six thousand cavalry, under General Forrest, that instead of using
on our flanks and rear, he sent off to Murfreesborough to take the fort
that was garrisoned by a few regiments of recent enlistment. The fort
was easily defended against Forrest and would have been had his force
been double what it was. Forrest was a raider, but in no sense a
fighter. Schofield had not more than twenty thousand men, all told, some
of which were on duty with the train. But twenty thousand old veterans,
as my old soldier friends will bear me witness here to-day, are hard to
go out and get, especially, if you come straight up to the front door,
and this Corporal Hood, in a very gentlemanly manner, did.

Hood formed his charging column in three lines, extending across the old
cotton field from east to west; his right reaching the river, his left
resting on the pike. About three o'clock he made his first assault. His
lines came on in fine style. The heavy guns in the fort commenced
shelling unmercifully as soon as the assaulting column emerged from
behind the hills, and when it reached a point near enough the field
artillery opened with shrapnel and canister, making fearful havoc in the
ranks of gray. But nothing daunted those charging lines, led by that
best of fighting generals, Pat Cleburne, came on until they reached a
point within two hundred yards of our works, when our infantry opened
such a murderous fire over that level field that no valor could stand
before its destructive torrent. The assaulting column broke, and the
personal presence of Hood and his daring lieutenant could not rally them
until they were behind the sheltering protection of the hills where they
were first formed. The assault was repeated time after time, until nine
o'clock that night. In one of these assaults the rebels charged to our
works and drove our first line out of them for a short distance; but
Colonel Opdyke's brigade, lying close in the rear, at once charged,
restoring the line and capturing over a thousand prisoners. The rebels
were taken entirely unawares by the charge made by Opdyke's brigade.
When they captured that portion of the line they seemed to think our
forces had left, for Opdyke found them sitting down on the top of the
works; some of them, having laid their guns aside and lighted their
pipes, were enjoying the _solace of the soldier_.

Our field artillery did most magnificent work, but suffered heavily. One
battery of the Ohio regiment of artillery lost all the men it had at one
gun, save a sergeant, and he loaded and gave the charging column one
dose of canister after his left arm had been blown off.

This battle of Franklin was one of the most sanguinary, and to the rebel
army one of the most disastrous, of the war. Hood lost four general
officers, among them was the celebrated Pat Cleburne, that our division
had been opposed to so many times on the Atlanta campaign. He fell in
one of the many charges that afternoon, his horse's fore legs resting on
our works. As soon as it was certain that the enemy did not intend to
renew the conflict that night, our troops began to retire to the south
side of the river. The bridge across the stream was covered with
blankets to a depth of six or eight inches, and the artillery was moved
across without noise; and by two o'clock a. m. of the thirty-first of
October the last regiment was on the south side of the river and on the
march for Nashville. Our wounded were left in the village, those that
could not be moved, and surgeons to take care of them.

About two o'clock that morning Colonel Pickands came to our company and
said "he had orders to leave one company in the position our regiment
had occupied during the battle, and concluded that company B must be the
one." The order was, "that we stay at the ford until orders were
received to abandon it;" said, "he would send back an orderly to notify
us when we could leave;" said, "we might all be captured," and he bade
me an affectionate farewell when he rode away. If any one doubts that
this was an anxious hour for us, he does not duly appreciate the
situation. It would have been nothing for mounted men, but we were
footmen and expected the enemy would send out a squadron of cavalry at
daybreak to ascertain what had become of those that had punished them so
the day before. We listened to the last footfall until it died away up
the stone pike toward Nashville, then all was still. I then went along
the line and told each one of the boys that when we were relieved, or if
attacked before the order came, we would about-face and move back in our
present order, deployed as skirmishers. About three-fourths of a mile to
the south on a gentle elevation was a poplar grove, and I insisted to
the boys that if we could maintain our line, in case of an attack,
either before or after the order of relief came, we could make a
splendid fight even against cavalry in those woods. I knew I could rely
upon the boys. I knew any 124th man could be relied upon during the
war—and since. Then we had nothing to do but wait. Not a sound was heard
across the river in Franklin, in the direction of the enemy. Sodom and
Gomorrah were not stiller after they received the sulphurous shower,
than was that intensely rebel village and their friends near the hills
beyond. The day-god began to streak the east with his golden rays, and
still no order came. No cheerful cockcrowing was heard as a harbinger of
the dawning day. The last rooster in the confederacy had been eliminated
long years before. Day began to break, and we strained our eyes up and
down the river and in the direction of Franklin, to see the approaching
foe, but all was still as death. Had we been forgotten? Had something
happened to the orderly? What good could we do by staying? But the order
was imperative, "stay until ordered away," and orders must be obeyed,
even if the brave men on this severe duty were relegated to captivity.
It was now broad daylight, and no orderly in sight. But no rebel cavalry
in sight either. The situation was strangely interesting in the extreme.
All at once we heard the ringing clatter of a horse's hoofs, and looking
up the pike—coming down the hill at breakneck pace—_came the orderly at
last_. Talk about sweet strains of music—not Theodore Thomas' orchestra,
rendering one of Beethoven's symphonies, could ever sound as sweetly as
the ringing of those hoof-beats on that limestone pike that October
morning. Riding up to me he said: "Captain, remove your men," and
turning his steed toward Nashville was soon out of sight over the hill.
We immediately began to _remove_. The order was obeyed, not only with
willingness, but with wonderous alacrity. We double-quicked in line
until we came to the poplar grove, when we, seeing no signs of pursuit,
came into column on the pike, and with a long step toward the front, and
a sharp lookout toward the rear, we rapidly measured off the miles in
the direction of Nashville. About eight o'clock that morning we came up
with the rear guard, and soon the balance of the regiment, making coffee
and breakfasting by the road side. We were greeted by the colonel and
the regiment with exclamations of joy. I told the colonel I was afraid
he had forgotten us, but he insisted we had not been out of his mind a
minute since he left us, which I have no doubt was true. But when the
facts came to be known, we were not in the least danger. Had we known at
that time that old Corporal Hood had so kindly sent all of his cavalry
away to Murfreesborough, where they could do him no good, and us no
possible harm, we would have stayed, made coffee, and eaten breakfast
before starting. In fact, I have no doubt some of the boys would have
been over in the village looking for "Robinson County," where they used
to find it while on picket months before. But, all in all, a portion of
the old 124th were the last union soldiers to leave Franklin, after the
bloody battle of the thirtieth of October, 1864.

But war has its sad features, even for an enemy as dishonorable and as
thoroughly hated as were the rebels. The beautiful village of Franklin
was riddled with shot and shell. The great cotton field to the south was
thickly covered with the graves of the confederate soldiers. The two
brothers of the sweet singer of rebel songs were both killed within a
few rods of their dear old home. But on the other hand, Miss Sally
Atkinson, after the war, _became the kind and loving wife of an officer
on General Thomas' staff, emblematical of the restored Union_.

The thirty-first we marched to Nashville, and the first of December took
our position on the line extending around the city, from the Tennessee
above to the river below. The line was a long one and necessarily thin.
Everything was in a bustle of excitement in the city. Hood was expected
to arrive and invest the city every hour. The gunboats were busy puffing
up and down the river looking after the flanks of our lines and the
various fords above and below. Every soldier in the hospitals that could
possibly perform duty was sent to the front. All the laborers that were
enlisted as such, and everyone that could use a pick and shovel, was
pressed into the service and set at work on the intrenchments. Every
private horse in the city was taken for the cavalry or artillery. The
right of ownership of private property, as applied to horseflesh, was in
no sense respected. Dan Castello's circus was performing at Nashville at
the time, and every horse was confiscated. Mrs. Lake's celebrated trick
horse, Czar, was the only one left, and that was undoubtedly owing to
the feeling of chivalry every true soldier has for a lady. We had been
in Nashville two days, I think, when Hood came up very leisurely and
formed his lines well out from ours. He did not act like business, and
evidently had not recovered from the terrible drubbing he had received
at Franklin. It was now midwinter in the climate of Tennessee, the mud
was deep, and it rained and sleeted almost every day. Hood did not even
ask for a skirmish, and his was the saddest army of investment that ever
encompassed a city. General Thomas was busy issuing clothing to his
army, and especially shoes, as our foot gear had been sadly demoralized
by the long march over stony roads and railway tracks back from Atlanta.
Our portion of the line ran in front of the Acklin Place, a charming
villa residence, built at an expense of a million and a half of dollars.
The owner was a Mr. Acklin, a wealthy Englishman, who, at his own
expense, fully armed and equipped a regiment of confederate infantry,
named for him "The Acklin Rifles." This Mr. Acklin _was not at home_, so
General Thomas took his spacious mansion for corps and division
headquarters. I am satisfied that never before was army headquarters so
ornamented with such paintings and marbles. We, on the outside, were
equally well off, for the spacious grounds were surrounded by nicely
built stone walls that were worked into chimneys noiselessly as was the
building of Solomon's Temple, and though not quite as ornamental, were
quite as useful, as that fabled temple of the olden time. The ornamental
trees did not make first-rate firewood on account of being green, but we
had not time for them to dry, and had to get along with them as best we
could. Here we had plenty of rations; and vegetables of all kinds were
issued to us in great abundance. The greatest evil we were compelled to
suffer, while here, was the sale of intoxicating liquor to the soldiers
in the city. The large majority of our regiment were reasonably
temperate men; but, I am sorry to be compelled to say that there was a
large amount of drunkenness in the army that made the men difficult to
control, and caused very many to lose their lives. Drunken officers in
command was a terrible evil.

I suppose no city in the United States ever had so bad a population as
the city of Nashville during the winter of 1864-5. The thieves, gamblers
and disreputable of both sexes, swarmed in from all over the country,
and at one time the demimonde became such a plague that General Thomas
loaded a steamboat with them and sent them to Louisville, but the
authorities there refused to let them land, and what became of them I
never knew; it may be they were destroyed for the good of the service.
It was no uncommon thing to find two or more dead soldiers, murdered in
an unsavory locality known as Smoky Row, every morning, and the original
inhabitants of the city were none too good to murder a union soldier if
they found him in a condition not to be able to take care of himself. If
there ever was a city that should have been disposed of as Atlanta and
Columbia were, that city was Nashville. But things were getting ripe for
action. Every day troops in squads, detachments and regiments, were
coming in by river and by rail. The 17th Army Corps, commanded by that
gray-headed old hero (noted for his choice (?) English), General A. J.
Smith, came up and took position at the right of our corps. General
Stedman, that did such good work with the reserve corps at Chickamauga,
commanded a division of colored troops on the extreme left, while more
artillery than was ever before made ready for battle, was being put into
position. There were grave apprehensions that Hood would cross the river
and move into Kentucky, as Bragg had done in 1862. The government at
Washington became alarmed, and sent General John A. Logan to relieve
General Thomas. It did seem that the General was terribly slow, but he
was preparing to give the rebel army such a crushing blow that when he
did strike no second blow would be necessary. General Logan came as far
as Louisville, and learning how General Thomas was situated and what he
was doing, refused to supersede him though he had the orders in his
pocket to that effect. _Was there a regular officer in the union service
that would have been that magnanimous?_

The morning of the fifteenth of December opened with everything about
our lines and camps veiled in an impenetrable fog. One could not see a
man ten feet away. Under the cover of this fog General Thomas opened a
demonstration on the enemy's right that caused Hood to weaken his left
to support his right. About ten o'clock a. m., as soon as the fog had
lifted a little, Thomas sent the dashing Kilpatrick in on Hood's extreme
left, followed by a charge from General A. J. Smith's entire corps.
General Smith's men simply ran over the rebels. When the rebel left had
been badly shattered by the charge made by Smith, and when the firing
showed the rebel line was crumbling, the 4th Corps in the center was
ordered in, and away we all went across an open field toward the rebel
works. The rebels in our front occupied a strong position behind a stone
wall that they had materially strengthened, but seemed to be dazed by
the impetuosity of the charge on the left and center, and hardly fired a
shot. I think in this charge our brigade captured more of the enemy than
we had men in line. When we passed the stone wall there was not an armed
rebel in front of us that we could discover. The firing was over along
the entire length of the line, and some of us thought that we had taken
all the rebels there were out there. I am of the opinion of all the
artillery firing we ever experienced, that of the battle of Nashville
was the most intense. When the cavalry commenced the charge on the
right, every gun in Fort Negley commenced firing, as well as all the
other forts and all the field and reserve artillery about Nashville. Of
all the pandemonian scenes we ever witnessed, this was the climax. The
firing was so intense and ceaseless that not an individual gun could be
distinguished, but there was one dreadful roar of shot and shell, and
all along the rebel lines and beyond, the bursting missiles filled the
air with clouds of smoke. I do not believe its equal was ever before
witnessed on the American continent, if in the world.

We pushed on to the front and found no enemy, and for some unexplained
reason did nothing more that day. If we had advanced in line of battle
immediately after the charge in the morning, I am firmly in the belief
that there would have been no second day's battle. On the second day we
moved to the front early in the morning, and found that the enemy had
gathered his scattered ranks, and had taken and fortified a position,
his line running across the Franklin pike. Our regiment was at the left
of the pike in an open wood. Our regiment was also at the left of the
brigade, and joined the right of Stedman's division of colored troops.
Colonel Post, by reason of seniority of rank, had command of our
brigade, and had been in command since the 89th Ill. had been added to
us at Atlanta. It seemed the same tactics were resorted to the second
day as the first, and at four o'clock p. m. we could distinctly hear
Smith's infantry hammering away directly in the rear of the rebel line.
All the afternoon Colonel Post had been soliciting General Wood to order
our brigade to charge the rebel position on the Franklin pike, but could
not obtain the consent of the old general, as he (Wood) said the charge
would result in driving the rebels away, while by waiting we could get
all of them without any trouble or loss. This was great big sense, and
there was not an officer or man in the brigade, save Colonel Post, that
did not realize the fact. But our brigade commander was anxious for a
star, and as old Tommy became more _spiritually-minded_, he consented to
let the old second brigade charge. The rebels had good rifle pits, but
nothing so strong as on the Atlanta campaign; but near the pike they had
a battery of field artillery, some of the guns of which had been
disabled early in the day. At the order to charge we moved on in fine
form until we came near the works, when the rebels opened on us with
canister that momentarily checked our advance. The colored infantry on
our left seemed to receive the most of the rebel fire, as Stedman's
division was in such a position that as soon as they came in range they
were enfiladed for more than three hundred yards of their line, and
consequently they suffered much more severely than our brigade. I never
saw more heroic conduct shown on the field of battle than was exhibited
by this body of men _so recently slaves_. I saw a color-bearer of one of
these regiments stand on the top of the rebel parapet and shake the flag
he bore in the faces of the confederate infantry until he fell, riddled
with bullets. Soon after this, owing to a slight accident of war, your
humble servant was compelled to go to the rear. But I remember (while
lying on a stretcher) I heard the shout of the old regiment (that I
could tell as I could my mother's voice), as they carried the rebel
works.

What I know about the remainder of the battle of Nashville, and the
pursuit of Hood, you of the old regiment and brigade know better than I.
The rebel infantry ran away, just as old Tommy had said they would. This
charge was a terribly severe and useless mistake. We had two brave young
officers, Payne[4] and Dempsey, killed, and many noble men killed and
wounded. And all for what? To gratify the ambition of an officer that
desired promotion. "What is ambition? 'Tis a glorious cheat."

Footnote 4:

  An own cousin of our colonel.

Colonel Post was badly punished for this foolish and needless charge he
had gotten us into. He received a canister shot through his right thigh
that nearly cost him his life, and in addition to that suffering _he was
elected to Congress from one of the districts of Illinois_.

[Illustration:

  _LIEUTENANT SAMUEL B. PAYNE._

  _Killed at the battle of Nashville Dec. 16th, 1864._
]

Hood's army was completely destroyed. When the second day of the battle
of Nashville was over, Hood had not a single infantry regiment in
organization. Forrest's cavalry was all the soldiers on which he could
rely. He lost every piece of artillery, every wagon. Many of his men
were recruited in Tennessee and Kentucky, and after the battle was over
they threw away their arms and accouterments and went to their homes,
never to enter the service again. The war in the west was substantially
over. Our regiment never fired another shot after the charge on Overton
Heights. They did some marching and quite a considerable traveling,
going as far on one occasion as Warm Springs, N. Car. But their fighting
service was over, and I believe we never lost a man after Nashville.
Corporal Hood, of the confederate army, was never heard from again, and
between Nashville and Atlanta there were not troops enough wearing the
gray to hinder General Thomas' army for one hour.

While the campaign from Atlanta to Nashville closed with the battle,
before ending this very imperfect sketch suffer me to refer to the last
scene at Nashville. The spring of 1865 had come. The long bloody, cruel
war was over. The wounds had healed. We were in camp in the vicinity of
Nashville, knowing we would soon be discharged and go to our own loved
Ohio. A grand review of all the troops about Nashville was ordered. It
was to be the last good-bye of "Old Pap Thomas" to the brave men he had
led so long. Never before was such preparation made for a review. Every
piece of leather, every piece of brass and steel, was burnished as
bright as time could make it. Never saw I the old regiment turn out in
such fine shape. All the remnants of the old bands we had were revived,
as far as possible. New sheepskin was in great demand. I cannot now tell
whether the wheezy old band that General Hazen had at Manchester was in
existence at that time, or whether it had been sacrificed for the good
of the service _and given harps_, as it should have been, long before.
The column for review was formed in divisions of regiments, that is, two
companies to the division. General Thomas and staff were stationed on a
gentle eminence, the bands playing, the old tattered colors flying, and
as each regiment came opposite the "Rock of Chickamauga," every hat came
off, and such cheers went up as had not greeted the old general since
the storming of Missionary Ridge. Just a little drawing about the mouth
was all the expression one could discover in the iron face of the grand
old Virginian.

A few years afterward I stood by the last resting place of General
George H. Thomas in the beautiful cemetery at Troy, N. Y., and while
standing there I thought, "here lies the remains of a proud southerner,
that 'faithful among the faithless stood,' that loved his native state
as well as any, but loved his country better, and few, if any, in life
did more to keep the flag of our Union waiving over a free and united
country."




                124th Regiment Ohio Volunteer Infantry.
                         THREE YEARS' SERVICE.


This Regiment was organized at Camp Cleveland, O., from August to
September, 1862, to serve three years. It was mustered out of service
July 9, 1865, in accordance with orders from the War Department.

The official list of battles in which this Regiment bore an honorable
part is not yet published by the War Department, but the following list
has been compiled after careful research during the preparation of this
work:

           THOMPSON'S STATION, TENN., MARCH 4-5, 1863.
           CHICKAMAUGA, GA.,          SEPTEMBER 19-20, 1863.
           LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN, TENN.,   NOVEMBER 24, 1863.
           MISSION RIDGE, TENN.,      NOVEMBER 25, 1863.
           ROCKY FACE RIDGE, GA.,     MAY 5-9, 1864.
           RESACA, GA.,               MAY 13-16, 1863.
           PICKETT'S MILLS, GA.,      MAY 27, 1864.
           BROWN'S FERRY, TENN.,      OCTOBER 27, 1864.
           FRANKLIN, TENN.,           NOVEMBER 30, 1864.
           NASHVILLE, TENN.,          DECEMBER 15-16, 1864.




                                 ROSTER
                                 OF THE
                124th Regiment, Ohio Volunteer Infantry.


                            FIELD AND STAFF.

 Mustered in from Aug. 20, 1862, to Feb. 28, 1864, at Cleveland, O., by
    J. R. Paxton, Captain 15th Infantry; Charles C. Goddard, Captain
     17th Infantry; C. O. Howard, Captain 18th Infantry, U. S. A.,
        and other Mustering Officers. Mustered out July 9, 1865,
           at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th
            Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d
                       Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 Oliver H. Payne │Col.  │  23│Sept. 11, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Lieut.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Colonel Oct. 22,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; promoted
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Colonel Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  resigned Nov. 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 James Pickands  │Lt.   │  23│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │Col.  │    │              │        │  Major Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; to Colonel
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 20, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  but not
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James B. Hampson│Major │  24│Aug. 17, 1861 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain Co. D,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Regiment O.
                 │      │    │              │        │  V. I., Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; killed May
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 George W. Lewis │do.   │  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain Co. B
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 18, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Lieut.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Colonel June 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, but not
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  lost left arm at
                 │      │    │              │        │  the battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1864.
 James W. Smith  │Surg. │    │Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned Jan. 31,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Dewitt C.       │do.   │  30│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Patterson     │      │    │              │        │  Asst. Surgeon
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 4, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 David A. Morse  │As.   │  22│Mar. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned Aug. 12,
                 │Sur.  │    │              │        │  1863.
 Theodore S.     │do.   │  25│April 21, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Bidwell       │      │    │              │        │  regiment July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sherburn B.     │Adjt. │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
   Eaton         │      │    │              │        │  Captain Co. F
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 23, 1863.
 Charles D.      │do.   │  18│Aug. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Hammer        │      │    │              │        │  private Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 23, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain Jan. 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, but
                 │      │    │              │        │  declined
                 │      │    │              │        │  promotion;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred as
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Co. G Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  26, 1865.
 Haskell F.      │do.   │  20│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from 1st
   Proctor       │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. G
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 26, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 29, 1865.
 Charles E.      │do.   │  38│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from 1st
   Warren        │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Albert H. Lewis │R. Q. │  20│Dec. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Commissioned 1st
                 │M.    │    │              │        │  Lieutenant and
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regimental
                 │      │    │              │        │  Quartermaster to
                 │      │    │              │        │  date Dec. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; resigned
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 3, 1863.
                 │      │    │              │        │  See Co. I.
 William Treat   │do.   │  34│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Q. M.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; to 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 13, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regimental
                 │      │    │              │        │  Quartermaster
                 │      │    │              │        │  from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 5, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Capt. Feb. 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, but
                 │      │    │              │        │  declined
                 │      │    │              │        │  promotion;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Seth D. Bowker  │Chap. │  35│Jan. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Resigned Sept. 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 John S. Nimmons │Sr.   │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │Maj.  │    │              │        │  private Co. E
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 1, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  2d Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Alexander C.    │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Caskey        │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 1, 1864; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A Oct. 13,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Alfred Wilson   │do.   │  24│Aug. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 1st Lieut.
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 12, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  but not
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William         │Q. M. │  29│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Nicholson     │S.    │    │              │        │  Corporal Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; reduced to
                 │      │    │              │        │  ranks Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 8, 1864.
 Charles C.      │do.   │  18│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Leonard       │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Enos Halsey     │do.   │  40│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. I
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Powell    │Com.  │  41│Sept. 16, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Corporal Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 1, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 William A. Reed │do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Charles C.      │Com.  │  19│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   Collins       │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Peter R. Granel │Hos.  │  41│Sept. 13, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │St'd. │    │              │        │  private Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 19, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Eugene W.       │Prin. │  18│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Striker       │Mus.  │    │              │        │  Musician Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 George Foster   │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 James C. White  │do.   │  37│Nov. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician Co. I
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Clark A. Fish   │do.   │  19│Feb. 28, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN WILLIAM WILSON._
]


                               COMPANY A.

  Mustered in Sept. 12, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by J. R. Paxton,
                         Captain 15th Infantry,
   U. S. A. Mustered out June 9, 1865, at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip
        Reefy, Captain 19th Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and
                 A. C. M. 3d Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 William Wilson  │Capt. │  42│July 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865.
 Haskell F.      │do.   │  20│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   Proctor       │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant and
                 │      │    │              │        │  Adjutant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Cleveland Van   │1st   │  27│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
   Dorn          │Lt.   │    │              │        │  Captain Co. D
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864.
 Alexander C.    │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Sergeant
   Caskey        │      │    │              │        │  from Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 16, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergt. Major May
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  13, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 George Doubleday│2d Lt.│  32│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned June 13,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 William Treat   │do.   │  34│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  from private
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 19, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to Q.
                 │      │    │              │        │  M. Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 2d Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 13, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 3, 1863.
 John S. Nimmons │do.   │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergt. Major
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 1, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Sept. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 John P. Lamb    │1st   │  30│July 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 2d
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 19, 1863.
 Harrison F.     │do.   │  22│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Henry         │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Elam A. Smith   │do.   │  19│July 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Eugene W.       │do.   │  22│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Elliott       │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov. 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 William H.      │Sergt.│  23│July 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Sept. 25,
   Selover       │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga
                 │      │    │              │        │  Hospital, of
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounds received
                 │      │    │              │        │  in battle at
                 │      │    │              │        │  same place.
 George D. Wing  │do.   │  23│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Oct. 1, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 George E.       │do.   │  27│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   Goodrich      │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Nov. 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Gilbert C.      │do.   │  22│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 28,
   Porter        │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Oliver E.       │do.   │  28│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Ellsworth     │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 10, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 John H. Zerly   │do.   │  22│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal March
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Andrew K. Rose  │do.   │  18│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 William Schubert│do.   │  19│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Eben W. Garzee  │Corp. │  29│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Charles C.      │do.   │  18│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Q. M.
   Leonard       │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 George F.       │do.   │  22│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
   Parsons       │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Edward G.       │do.   │  23│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 5, 1864,
   Bartlett      │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 George H. Foster│do.   │  22│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Madison, Ind.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 George N. Miner │do.   │  22│Sept. 5, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Andrew          │do.   │  18│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 1,
   Crittenden    │      │    │              │        │  1864; captured
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 19, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in action. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 John E. Duncan  │Corp. │  18│July 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Zara Ellsworth  │do.   │  23│July 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Adrian C. Stone │do.   │  18│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Gotlieb Reuss   │do.   │  20│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed April 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Franklin Fuller │do.   │  19│July 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed April 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Thomas Hammond  │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 George Foster   │Mus.  │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Principal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Eugene W.       │do.   │  18│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
   Striker       │      │    │              │        │  Principal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 George H. Gates │Wag.  │  27│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Manchester,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 John Lovejoy    │do.   │  21│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Ames, Samuel H. │Priv. │  31│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Austin, Charles │do.   │  24│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 1,
   E.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Austin, Orlando │do.   │  27│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  9, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Barberic,       │do.   │  38│Oct. 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug. 2,
   William       │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Bartlett,       │do.   │  30│Aug. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged to
   Frederick J.  │      │    │              │        │  accept promotion
                 │      │    │              │        │  in 27th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment. U. S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Colored Troops,
                 │      │    │              │        │  from which
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 21, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Captain.
 Bartlett, John  │do.   │  22│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 10,
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Bates, Samuel   │do.   │  17│Nov. 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Beck, Michael   │do.   │  34│Nov. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Beckwith,       │do.   │  18│Jan. 20, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │
   Franklin      │      │    │              │        │
 Brainard, Edward│do.   │  28│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.
 Brainard,       │do.   │  20│Aug. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   Sanford R.    │      │    │              │        │  151st Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June Corps; 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Brown, George W.│do.   │  20│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  H, 5th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Indianapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Bryan, William  │Priv. │  30│Aug. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Wounded Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 8, 1865, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Carpenter,      │do.   │  18│Feb. 15, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug.
   Samuel        │      │    │              │        │  29, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Church, Orlando │do.   │  24│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec. 9,
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Madison, Ind.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Clague, William │do.   │  24│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  U. S. Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 27, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Cornwall, Willis│do.   │  20│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 15,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.
 Cowley, Thomas  │do.   │  20│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  U. S. Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  15, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 27, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Duncan, George  │do.   │  21│July 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
   J.            │      │    │              │        │  13, 1863.
 Durian, John C. │do.   │  21│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  3, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.
 Empson, William │do.   │  21│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Captured Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; paroled May
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 23, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Camp Chase,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Ex, Nicholas    │do.   │  40│Nov. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Finney, William │do.   │  18│Nov. 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Feb. 1, 1864,
   O.            │      │    │              │        │  at Clinton Cross
                 │      │    │              │        │  Roads, Tenn.
 Foote, Edwin    │do.   │  27│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Feb. 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Fritz, Jacob    │do.   │  21│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received near
                 │      │    │              │        │  Resaca, Ga.
 Gates, Edwin N. │do.   │  20│Aug. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Wounded Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Gibbs, Charles  │do.   │  23│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; transferred
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 120th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, March 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 29,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Evansville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Gifford, Thomas │do.   │  24│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
   S.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Gould, Isaac H. │do.   │  29│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Gould, John W.  │do.   │  23│Aug. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Sept. 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Graves, Lewis   │do.   │  24│July 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Green, Herbert  │do.   │  20│Aug. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   T.            │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hall, Chauncy D.│Priv. │  21│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Hamlin, Job     │do.   │  43│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C, 12th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Nov. 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Hammer, Charles │do.   │  18│Aug. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   D.            │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced to ranks
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. —, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieut. and
                 │      │    │              │        │  Adjutant May 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Hardy, Isaac    │do.   │  19│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland,  O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Haskins, Lyman  │do.   │  20│Dec. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Herr, Benjamin  │do.   │  23│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Herr, Daniel    │do.   │  22│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 28, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Washington,
                 │      │    │              │        │  D. C., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Herr, David Z.  │do.   │  19│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hodgeman, David │do.   │  23│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   P.            │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; died March
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Hodgeman, John  │do.   │  33│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Holden, Elisha  │do.   │  22│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Wounded May 15,
   M.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  15, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Hudden, William │do.   │  44│Nov. 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Hudson, Richard │do.   │  30│Nov. 9, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Jewett, William │do.   │  33│Nov. 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Kenfield, Henry │do.   │  19│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Kent, Edwin A.  │do.   │  26│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  11, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 King, Franklin  │do.   │  22│Sept. 23, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Kyser, Peter    │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Larwin, Robert  │do.   │  21│Nov. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Lingle,         │do.   │  18│Aug. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   Christian     │      │    │              │        │  11, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Litchfield, John│do.   │  31│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Nov. 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Mission
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Tenn.
 Losey, William  │do.   │  19│July 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Captured Sept. 19,
   F.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga., mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at Camp
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chase, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 McGarvey, Robert│Priv. │  43│Jan. 10, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 McGirk, John    │do.   │  36│Nov. 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Maskall, Thomas │do.   │  42│Nov. 9, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Died June 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Mathews, Isaac  │do.   │  23│Nov. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Meheo, Edward   │do.   │  40│Nov. 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Murry, Michael  │do.   │  17│Nov. 9, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 O'Brien, Andrew │do.   │  18│Nov. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Offolderf, Durs │do.   │  42│Nov. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Page, Edwin S.  │do.   │  17│Nov. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  155th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Oct. 7,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Quayle, Samuel  │do.   │  18│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Reed, William A.│do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Com.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Oct. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Russell, Wilbur │do.   │  25│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died March 17,
   F.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Schneerer, Henry│do.   │  22│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Captured Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at Camp
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dennison, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Segmire, Jacob  │do.   │  19│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 31, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Manchester,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Selover,        │do.   │  18│July 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb.
   Theodore A.   │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Shepard, Elvert │do.   │  25│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   M.            │      │    │              │        │  C, 17th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 30, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Indianapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Shepard, Ralph  │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Shutliff, Gordon│do.   │  30│Sept. 18, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Sipe, Adam      │do.   │  25│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Smith, Osias C. │do.   │  19│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  15, 1863.
 Stevenson,      │do.   │  28│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Thomas        │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Swarts, Gottlieb│do.   │  18│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sweeny, Edward  │do.   │  17│Dec. 2, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Died Oct. 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Sweeny, John    │do.   │  34│Dec. 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 Thompson, Hiram │do.   │  19│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Trow, Elijah    │Priv. │  21│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Vanavery, Oscar │do.   │  25│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Vosler, Jacob   │do.   │  20│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 4,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Knoxville, Tenn.
 Wallace, Henry  │do.   │  18│Aug. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Prisoner of war
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  ——; exchanged
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 16, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Camp Chase,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Watkins, Lewis  │do.   │  18│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   M.            │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Webster, Arthur │do.   │  18│Nov. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 8, 1865.
 White, John     │do.   │  25│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Williams, James │do.   │  29│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; killed May
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Wing, Adelbert  │do.   │  18│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Wing, Stephen P.│do.   │  44│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Paroled prisoner;
                 │      │    │              │        │  died Jan. 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Middleburg, O.
 Wyeth, Jonathan │do.   │  19│Aug. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 2, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Annapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Md.
 Wykes, Richard  │do.   │  22│Aug. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Yost, David     │do.   │  21│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN GEORGE W. LEWIS._
]


                               COMPANY B.

  Mustered in Sept. 16, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by J. R. Paxton,
                         Captain 15th Infantry,
   U. S. A. Mustered out June 9, 1865, at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip
        Reefy, Captain 19th Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and
                 A. C. M. 3d Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 George W. Lewis │Capt. │  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Major
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 18, 1865.
 William Hannon  │do.   │  41│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 18, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 John Raidaie    │1st   │  28│July 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 23,
                 │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1862; promoted
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Captain Co. G
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864.
 John Stevens    │do.   │  34│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Capt. Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 29, 1865.
 Charles D.      │do.   │  18│Aug. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Hammer        │      │    │              │        │  Co. G June 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Charles M.      │2d Lt.│  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 23,
   Steadman      │      │    │              │        │  1862; promoted
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. D
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga., May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Cyrus C. Inman  │1st   │  23│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Sept. 16, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  26, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounded Nov. —,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863 in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Mission
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Tenn.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Aug. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Japheth S. Sevoy│Sergt.│  30│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Orson Vanderhoff│do.   │  24│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Lloyd A. Marsh  │do.   │  21│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private May 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 William P.      │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Williard      │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 16, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Aug. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Elias Freman    │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  May —, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Aug. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 William Wheeler │Corp. │  38│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Williard C.     │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Starr         │      │    │              │        │  G, 21st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Jan. 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Trenton, N. J.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Nathan G.       │do.   │  28│Aug. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Sutliff       │      │    │              │        │  K Feb. 2, 1864.
 Frank Bruce     │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Moses Fuller    │do.   │  28│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 28, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Lewis Peters    │do.   │  20│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 31,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, while on
                 │      │    │              │        │  picket duty,
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Dallas,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 William Atkins  │do.   │  19│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Frank Ware      │do.   │  23│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Franklin        │do.   │  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed August
   Monosmith     │      │    │              │        │  8, 1864; wounded
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 16, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in battle at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out May 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cincinnati, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Stephen Kemmery │do.   │  23│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Jan. 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Stephen Kensey.
 Larett Spring   │do.   │  20│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Jan. 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Simeon V. Seeley│Corp. │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Arthur W.       │do.   │  18│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 8,
   Bullong       │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 John W. Weaver  │do.   │  24│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed
 Jared F. Maynes │Mus.  │  35│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 12, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Franklin
                 │      │    │              │        │  Main.
 Chester Perkins │Wag.  │  30│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Andreas, Israel │Priv. │  19│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Andreas, William│do.   │  23│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  24, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Benton, George  │do.   │  23│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Lost Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Bowman, Alfred  │do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Bowman, John M. │do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E ——.
 Chapman, George │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug. 8,
   O.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Chapman, Lucius │do.   │  26│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 16,
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Chase, George   │do.   │  27│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Colburn, Nathan │do.   │  21│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
   K.            │      │    │              │        │  14, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Crow, John      │do.   │  23│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 13,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at Homer,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O.
 Curtice, David  │do.   │  17│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Damon, James    │do.   │  28│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Daugherty, Lyman│do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
   F.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Dennis, John L. │do.   │  29│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ensign, Calvin  │do.   │  21│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Everett, Ambrose│do.   │  18│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 8, 1864,
   M.            │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Resaca, Ga.
 Flickinger,     │do.   │  18│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Nov. 25,
   Morris        │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Mission
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Tenn.
 French, Lorenzo │do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 14,
   G.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Freyman, Ezra   │do.   │  27│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  21, 1863. on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Fritz, Dexter   │do.   │  24│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 5, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Dallas, Ga.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills.
 Gardner, Stephen│do.   │  20│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  27, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Haines, David B.│Priv. │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Haines, Elias   │do.   │  19│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Haines, Jacob   │do.   │  37│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 6, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Haines, Philip  │do.   │  18│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 29,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Haines, William │do.   │  18│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hanse, George A.│do.   │  24│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hendee, Nelson  │do.   │  18│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   S.            │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hull, David     │do.   │  22│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Hull, Franklin  │do.   │  20│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  5, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Hunt, William H.│do.   │  19│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Huntington,     │do.   │  24│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 23,
   Charles       │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Inman, Alonzo W.│do.   │  27│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864,at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 15, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Camp
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dennison, O., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Jeffries, George│do.   │  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   C.            │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. B, 18th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Nov. 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June —,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Kemmery, William│do.   │  26│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  as William H.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Kensey.
 Kinney, Russell │do.   │  22│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  F, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Feb. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Koons,          │do.   │  21│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Washington    │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Keyser, David A.│do.   │  26│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  139th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Nov. 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Liby, Gideon    │do.   │  23│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  14, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Long, Jacob     │do.   │  28│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Lowe, Alexander │do.   │  21│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  Musician; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 13, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tennessee.
 Lowe, James     │Priv  │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Lowe, Robert    │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 McCoy, Thomas N.│do.   │  25│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mahan, Patrick  │do.   │  19│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  14, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Martin, John    │do.   │  20│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 3, 1861,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Dallas, Ga.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga., May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Miller, Nathan  │do.   │  44│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mills, Nathan W.│do.   │  28│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; transferred
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 43d Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Dept.
 Monosmith,      │do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Benton        │      │    │              │        │
 Morrison, Daniel│do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Moyer, Israel   │do.   │  25│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Oakley, Seth D. │do.   │  19│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  7, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Obendorf,       │do.   │  19│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   William       │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Palmer, William │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 8,
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Pierson, Isaac  │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Powers, Ai      │do.   │  33│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Seeley        │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Powers, Timothy │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Rearich, Edward │do.   │  18│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D, 8th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Dec. 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Rice, Frank H.  │do.   │  28│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Wagoner;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865.
 Robb, John M.   │do.   │  23│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Shelhart,       │do.   │  18│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
   Charles       │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Smith, Crawford │do.   │  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Smith, Hamilton │do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Sooy, Andrew J. │do.   │  26│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga.
 Stevenson,      │do.   │  37│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Richard J.    │      │    │              │        │  I, 12th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Dec. 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C, by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Stone, Deloss S.│Priv  │  30│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged May
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Tilly, William  │do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 3, 1863,
   T.            │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Vandemark,      │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Alex'd'r      │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; killed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 25, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mission Ridge,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tennessee.
 Vandemark,      │do.   │  20│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Joseph        │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; to Co. A,
                 │      │    │              │        │  15th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Nov. 24,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C, by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Walters, Adam   │do.   │  26│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal; killed
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 27, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Weaver, Henry D.│do.   │  23│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Winters, William│do.   │  27│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st. U. S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 27, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Woodworth,      │do.   │  18│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Jan.
   Watson M.     │      │    │              │        │  27, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Young, Jackson  │do.   │  21│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN ROBERT WALLACE._
]

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN JAMES T. McGINNIS._
]


                               COMPANY C.

  Mustered in from Oct. 31 to Dec. 31, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by
      Charles C. Goddard, Captain 17th Infantry, and C. O. Howard,
       Captain 18th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9, 1865,
        at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th Ohio
          Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d Division,
                            4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 Robert Wallace  │Capt  │  34│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned May 22,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Daniel Stratton │do.   │  28│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  6, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commission
                 │      │    │              │        │  returned;
                 │      │    │              │        │  recommissioned
                 │      │    │              │        │  to date May 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; resigned
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 18, 1863.
 John B. Irwin   │do.   │  21│Nov. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. G
                 │      │    │              │        │  to date Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 24, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 James T.        │Capt. │  18│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   McGinnis      │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. F
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865
 William R. Waldo│1st   │  20│Dec. 13, 1861 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
                 │Lt.   │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. A,
                 │      │    │              │        │  128th O. V. I.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 6, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commission
                 │      │    │              │        │  returned;
                 │      │    │              │        │  recommissioned
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 20, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commanded Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  from Sept. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, to ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  died July 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received June
                 │      │    │              │        │  13, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Samuel B. Payne │do.   │  21│June 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed Dec. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Samuel P. Fulton│do.   │  24│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 23, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commanded Co. I
                 │      │    │              │        │  from April 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, to June
                 │      │    │              │        │  14, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John O'Brien    │2d Lt.│  33│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned April 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 John P. Lamb    │do.   │  30│July 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 19, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 20, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  but not
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  resigned June
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863.
 John Stevens    │1st   │  34│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 2d
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 20, 1863.
 John K.         │do.   │  27│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
   Batcheldor    │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. G
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 3, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1865, but
                 │      │    │              │        │  not mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Dexter Lane     │Sergt.│  30│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Josiah M. Holt  │do.   │  25│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Erastus         │do.   │  44│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Nickerson     │      │    │              │        │  E, 8th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Sept. 22,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Frank Roch      │do.   │  30│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Christopher C.  │do.   │  21│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Oliver        │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 David           │do.   │  20│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Shaughnessy   │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 10, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James L. Johnson│do.   │  23│Jan. 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Sept. 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; reduced to
                 │      │    │              │        │  ranks Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reappointed Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William Redness │do.   │  22│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corp.
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergt. Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Joseph          │Sergt.│  18│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
   Montgomery    │      │    │              │        │  Corporal June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Walch     │Corp. │  27│Sept. 20, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  148th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, April 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 John R. Tudor   │do.   │  28│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 John Lynch      │do.   │  30│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died June 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Atlanta, Ga., of
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounds received
                 │      │    │              │        │  in action.
 Reuben L. Abby  │do.   │  31│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 16, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 William Manning │do.   │  40│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Feb. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Edward Murphy   │do.   │  19│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Feb. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Roche     │do.   │  18│Dec. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Feb. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Charles Vernon  │do.   │  17│Dec. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Feb. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 4,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Melvin L.       │do.   │  25│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
   Shepard       │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Isaac Taylor    │do.   │  36│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Wesley I. Emmons│do.   │  18│Dec. 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Joseph Benson   │do.   │  20│Feb. 10, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Trace L. Barnes │Mus.  │  33│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. H Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; captured
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; died Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rebel Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Richmond, Va.
 Clark A. Fish   │do.   │  19│Feb. 28, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Principal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Samuel J. Brown │do.   │  33│Sept. 30, 1864│ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William Lathrop │do.   │  16│Feb. 8, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John Misner     │Wag.  │  35│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  20th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——, from
                 │      │    │              │        │  which
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Navy May 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Allen, William  │Priv. │  33│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   G.            │      │    │              │        │
 Anderson, John  │do.   │  35│Dec. 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 3, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Andrews, George │do.   │  18│Feb. 26, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ault, Thomas C. │Priv. │  40│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Best, Hugh      │do.   │  22│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Brown, George W.│do.   │  18│Dec. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Brown, Hugh     │do.   │  29│Sept. 30, ——  │ 3 yrs. │
 Buckmaster,     │do.   │  22│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Marion        │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Bushon, Orange  │do.   │  18│Feb. 13, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
   C.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Casey, John     │do.   │  19│Dec. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Nov. 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Missionary
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Tenn.
 Cole, James D.  │do.   │  24│Dec. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb. 7,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Cole, John D.   │do.   │  22│Dec. 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  3, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Conners, William│do.   │  27│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Craddock,       │do.   │  26│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
   Prestwood     │      │    │              │        │
 Culliton, James │do.   │  40│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Cushing, William│do.   │  24│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G, 125th O. V.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I., Nov. 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862.
 Davis, John     │do.   │  18│Nov. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Dodson, John A. │do.   │  44│Nov. 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Ducey, Michael  │do.   │  20│Jan. 16, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Ellemwood,      │do.   │  24│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Andrew        │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Engleson, Henry │do.   │  28│Jan. 28, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  13, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Fallen, Owen    │do.   │  24│Sept. 10, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Farnesworth,    │do.   │  35│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Civilian O.   │      │    │              │        │
 Ferguson, Samuel│do.   │  35│Feb. 2, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Died May 31, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jeffersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind.
 Fisher, John C. │do.   │  26│Sept. 23, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Fisk, Alfred    │do.   │  42│Dec. 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Fitch, Loren    │do.   │  19│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Flanigan, John  │do.   │  40│Oct. 18,      │  1862  │3 yrs.
 Flynn, Andrew   │do.   │  20│Oct. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Forsyth, James  │do.   │  25│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 25,
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.
 Fox, George     │do.   │  44│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Fritz, John     │do.   │  25│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Nov. —,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near same place.
 Fuller, Luman   │Priv. │  18│Dec. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded May 15,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 10, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Louisville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ky., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Gallagher,      │do.   │  25│Dec. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Thomas        │      │    │              │        │
 Gardner, Thomas │do.   │  18│Jan.  8, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb. 6,
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Gillison,       │do.   │  19│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   Allison S.    │      │    │              │        │  165th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps. ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 29, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Goode, Frederick│do.   │  31│Feb. 20, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Green, Luke     │do.   │  37│Jan.  4, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Groochee, Joseph│do.   │  26│Nov.  9, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. C Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, to Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Reserve Corps
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——.
 Halterman,      │do.   │  19│Oct.  8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 26,
   Matthias      │      │    │              │        │  1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.
 Harrington,     │do.   │  17│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Edward        │      │    │              │        │  Musician.
 Hasson, John    │do.   │  25│Oct.  8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Hicks, Egbert   │do.   │  29│Dec. 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 22,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Hopwood, John   │do.   │  42│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 7, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Hunt, Samuel    │do.   │  38│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  H, 16th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 5, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Harrisburg, Pa.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Iles, John      │do.   │  40│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Isbel, Frederick│do.   │  38│Oct.  8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Jago, Alfred L. │do.   │  20│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Jennings, John  │do.   │  19│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  22, 1862, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  civil authority.
 Jewett, Edward  │do.   │  33│Oct. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   E.            │      │    │              │        │  F, 15th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 1, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cairo, Ill., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Johnson, Thomas │do.   │  40│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died Feb. 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Jones, Edward E.│do.   │  25│Nov. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Joyce, John     │do.   │  19│Dec.  3, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Joyce, Patrick  │do.   │  18│Dec.  3, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded ——, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out May 24,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Kanala, Thomas  │do.   │  30│Oct.  8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Kidney, Nathan  │do.   │  40│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Quincy, Ill., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Lee, Richard    │Priv. │  25│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Linder, Edward  │do.   │  26│Jan. 6, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Wounded ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Edward
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sinder.
 Linge, George   │do.   │  42│Jan. 27, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  24, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Lowrie, William │do.   │  18│Feb. 22, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out April
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  15, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dept.
 McBane, Charles │do.   │  44│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died May 10, 1864,
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 McCort, James   │do.   │  27│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died June 29,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 McDonald, James │do.   │  27│Sept. 15, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Captured Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; exchanged
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 3, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 8, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Chase, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 McGuckin, Hugh  │do.   │  27│Sept. 16, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 McIntosh, James │do.   │  22│Dec. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 McWilliams, John│do.   │  33│Jan. 12, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Madison, James  │do.   │  24│Dec. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Mahoney, Timothy│do.   │  33│Dec. 3, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mallo, George   │do.   │  25│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal.
 Matthews, Henry │do.   │  18│Dec. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Money, Jacob    │do.   │  32│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Mosier, John M. │do.   │  26│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Murphy, Patrick │do.   │  30│May 17, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Captured ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 14, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in Rebel Prison
                 │      │    │              │        │  at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Myron, John     │do.   │  40│Nov. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Newnham, Charles│do.   │  24│Nov. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 5, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Obenour,        │do.   │  26│Oct. 23, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Frederick     │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Parker, Charles │do.   │  41│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  28, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Patton, John R. │do.   │  20│Dec. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Peake, George   │do.   │  27│Oct. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Preston, Martin │do.   │  37│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged——, on
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Putt, Richard   │do.   │  18│Sept. 26, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Wounded ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged May
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Quigley, William│Priv. │  18│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Captured Jan. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Dandridge,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.; exchanged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Quinn, Arthur   │do.   │  44│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died Feb. 5, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on board
                 │      │    │              │        │  transport at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dover, Tenn.
 Ray, John       │do.   │  25│Aug. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed Dec. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Rayon, William  │do.   │  33│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  William Rager;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Reiger, George  │do.   │  31│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Ritter, Reuben  │do.   │  32│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged——, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Roden, Peter    │do.   │  44│Oct. 23, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Peter
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rodam;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Rogers, George  │do.   │  30│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Rood, Riley L.  │do.   │  30│Feb. 20, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ryde, Jacob     │do.   │  35│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sexton, Amos C. │do.   │  42│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Shanley, William│do.   │  28│Jan. 14, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sheltz, John    │do.   │  21│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Marion        │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Shepard, John   │do.   │  20│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Sherman, Joseph │do.   │  27│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Slack, Henry    │do.   │  21│Mar. 1, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Smith, James    │do.   │  21│Oct.  1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Smith, Martin   │do.   │  19│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Smith, William  │do.   │  30│Oct. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Spooner, Henry  │do.   │  32│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Rejected Oct. 31,
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  1862, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  Examining
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon.
 Stillson,       │do.   │  26│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
   Franklin      │      │    │              │        │  16, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Styre, Charles  │do.   │  18│Dec. 26, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   E.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; also borne
                 │      │    │              │        │  on rolls as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Charles Styne.
 Thompson, James │do.   │  29│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Tice, John      │do.   │  19│Dec. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Todd, George    │do.   │  24│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to 4th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment, U. S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cavalry, Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1862.
 Waltz, Frank    │do.   │  23│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Walworth,       │do.   │  20│Dec. 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   Wallace       │      │    │              │        │  28, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Welsh, Patrick  │do.   │  18│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out May 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Westerman, Jacob│Priv. │  24│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Wilde, Robert K.│do.   │  32│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Wylie, Thomas   │do.   │  40│Nov. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Young, Marshall │do.   │  25│Nov. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   D.            │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 12, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN GEORGE W. AUMEND._
]

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN CLEVELAND VAN DORN._
]


                               COMPANY D.

    Mustered in Oct. 30, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by Charles C.
     Goddard, Captain 17th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9,
        1865, at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th
            Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d
                       Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 George W. Aumend│Capt. │  25│Aug. 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Oct. 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; died May
                 │      │    │              │        │  —, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Plymouth, O.
 Cleveland Van   │do.   │  27│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   Dorn          │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William C.      │1st   │  31│Aug. 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Oct. 26,
   Travis        │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1862; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 22, 1863.
 Hiram H. Manning│do.   │  21│Dec. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 10, 1863.
 Charles M.      │do.   │  25│Aug. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
   Stedman       │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. B
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 George Daum     │do.   │  38│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1863; to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1864; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain July 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, but not
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Terence A.      │2d Lt.│  25│Sept. 19, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   Dempsey       │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 22, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E March 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Frank W. Smith  │1st   │  20│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │  ——; 1st Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  captured May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 7, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Chase, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Henry Daniels   │do.   │  19│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 1, 1864; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Isaac L. Stout  │Sergt.│  25│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died May 9, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Franklin,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Joshua Norcross │do.   │  36│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 William Dauson  │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died March 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Philip Wolf     │do.   │  21│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E, 5th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 5, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Indianapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Isaac T. Slough │do.   │  21│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John T. Bercan  │do.   │  23│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 20, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Isaiah Bales    │do.   │  23│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Frank Carr      │do.   │  18│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  awarded medal of
                 │      │    │              │        │  honor by
                 │      │    │              │        │  Secretary of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War, Feb. 22,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, for
                 │      │    │              │        │  bravery in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., Dec. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James O.        │Corp. │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died April 8,
   Hutchinson    │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Knoxville, Tenn.
 Matthew Moarn   │do.   │  20│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Chase, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 George Derr     │do.   │  22│Aug. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed April 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Frank Neff      │do.   │  19│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 26, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Mark F. Bercan  │do.   │  19│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed April 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Fredrich        │do.   │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Jan. 1,
   Gindling      │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Edward Wilhelm  │do.   │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Joseph Steward  │do.   │  20│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Hiram H. Bowman │do.   │  18│Dec. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John G. Louby   │do.   │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; reduced at
                 │      │    │              │        │  his own request
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; reappointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 28, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William L.      │Mus.  │  40│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Jan.
   Duncan        │      │    │              │        │  15, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Joseph P.       │Wag.  │  42│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
   Robinson      │      │    │              │        │  15, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pulaski, Tenn.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Anderson, ——    │Priv. │    │              │ 3 yrs. │
 Anson, Alphonso │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Ashford, Herbert│do.   │  18│Dec. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Bates, Samuel   │do.   │  18│Nov. 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Baumgardner,    │do.   │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died July 6, 1863,
   Frank         │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Beck, Michael   │do.   │  34│Nov. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Beckwith, Herman│do.   │  25│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Bickford, Reuben│do.   │  25│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Both, Jacob     │do.   │  20│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Both, Nicholas  │do.   │  23│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Bower, Peter    │do.   │  35│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Brown, Kemp P.  │do.   │  43│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Buhler, George  │do.   │  26│Dec. 29, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
   F.            │      │    │              │        │
 Cahal, Peter F. │do.   │  19│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Clark, James    │do.   │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Collins, James  │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Cooper, Amos G. │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Covert, Edward  │do.   │  40│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
   C.            │      │    │              │        │
 Daub, Peter     │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 10, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Day, Henry      │do.   │  18│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1862, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  civil authority.
 Donley,         │do.   │  23│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Sylvester     │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Driscal, Daniel │do.   │  30│Dec. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Edwards, Joel A.│do.   │  21│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Evans, Theodore │do.   │  18│Dec. 29, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
   R.            │      │    │              │        │  23, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Everett, Edson  │Priv. │  33│Sept. 28, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged July 6,
   S.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Ex, Nicholas    │do.   │  40│Oct. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Fields, Joseph  │do.   │  31│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Fleming, Sidney │do.   │  24│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  30, 1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Fulk, Peter     │do.   │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Feb. 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 2, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  St. Louis, Mo.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle.
 Gore, George W. │do.   │  19│Oct. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 9, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Haley, Joseph J.│do.   │  31│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Harrison, John  │do.   │  24│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died April 14,
   Q.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Homan, Edward   │do.   │  40│Oct. 23, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at Bull's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Gap, Tenn.
 Hoover, John    │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died March 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Hornung, Henry  │do.   │  19│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hudden, William │do.   │  44│Nov. 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; on duty at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tod Barracks,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 Hudson, Albert  │do.   │  18│Feb. 16, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   E.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hudson, James   │do.   │  19│Dec. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Hudson, Richard │do.   │  30│Nov. 5, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Hurd, Sherman C.│do.   │  40│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Oct. 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Jewett, William │do.   │  33│Nov. 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Johnson, George │do.   │  19│Dec. 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Jones, George N.│do.   │  42│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Kenney, William │do.   │  23│Aug. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Kenstill, Wendel│do.   │  38│Aug. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  87th Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, March 24,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 King, John      │do.   │  18│Jan. 23, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Dec. —,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tennessee.
 Lamb, James     │do.   │  20│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Leary, Perry    │Priv. │  24│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  13, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Lewis,          │do.   │  27│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 11,
   Bennazette    │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Lingo, Calvin   │do.   │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Lisch, Joseph   │do.   │  20│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Luce,           │do.   │  19│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 17,
   Christopher   │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Annapolis, Md.
 McCormick, John │do.   │  35│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   J.            │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; died May
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.
 McCormick,      │do.   │  22│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
   Thomas        │      │    │              │        │  12, 1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Cleveland,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 McDonnan, Frank │do.   │  20│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 McGirk, John    │do.   │  36│Nov. 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June, 8
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 McGuire, Thomas │do.   │  30│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged May
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 McKay,          │do.   │  24│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Florentine    │      │    │              │        │  Co. F ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 McKenzie, Bates │do.   │  20│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 McKenzie, Tracy │do.   │  24│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Mansfield, Peter│do.   │  29│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 March, Frederick│do.   │  28│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  31, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 March, George   │do.   │  19│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Markley, Abraham│do.   │  19│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mess, Peter     │do.   │  19│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at Camp
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dennison, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Middleton, James│do.   │  40│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Miller, Henry   │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Morse, Sylvester│do.   │  19│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 5, 1864.
 Mossier, Ananias│do.   │  18│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mossier, Josiah │do.   │  20│Jan. 8, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Murphy, Arthur  │do.   │  19│Dec. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Myrise, Thomas  │do.   │  35│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out July
                 │      │    │              │        │  3, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Myers, Franklin │Priv. │  18│Dec. 2, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Null, Henry     │do.   │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Oakley, Joseph  │do.   │  38│Aug. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 O'Donneau,      │do.   │  30│Dec. 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
   Michael       │      │    │              │        │  27, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Michael
                 │      │    │              │        │  O'Donohue.
 Offolderf, Durs │do.   │  42│Nov. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Ordway, Thomas  │do.   │  27│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Sept. 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Detroit, Mich.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Parmer,         │do.   │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
   Jefferson     │      │    │              │        │  8, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Partel, George  │do.   │  33│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
   W.            │      │    │              │        │
 Partel, John E. │do.   │  31│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st U. S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Penny,          │do.   │  18│Aug. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Christopher   │      │    │              │        │  Co. E Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; died Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  23, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of same
                 │      │    │              │        │  place.
 Piester, Conrad │do.   │  25│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st U. S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Polock, Robert  │do.   │  24│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Porter, Orlando │do.   │  18│Dec. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Rasor, Augustus │do.   │  18│Dec. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ridicar, Henry  │do.   │  43│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Rohn, Henry     │do.   │  31│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Schaffer,       │do.   │  27│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 14,
   Christian     │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.
 Schoenholtz,    │do.   │  36│Dec. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Henry         │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Shelt, John     │do.   │  34│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced to ranks
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 1, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Smith, Canada   │do.   │  27│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Snyder, William │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 15, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Snyder, George  │Priv. │  19│Aug. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Steinberg,      │do.   │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Morris        │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Steward,        │do.   │  18│Feb. 24, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Frederick     │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sturdevant,     │do.   │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   James         │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sweeny, John    │do.   │  34│Dec. 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Thatcher, John  │do.   │  20│Oct. 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   H.            │      │    │              │        │
 Vond, Nelson    │do.   │  26│Dec. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Wagner, John    │do.   │  28│Jan. 8, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out July
                 │      │    │              │        │  11, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jeffersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Watkins, Charles│do.   │  18│Jan. 23, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Watson, Andrew  │do.   │  26│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 12, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Franklin,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Webster, Arthur │do.   │  18│Nov. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. A June 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Werline, John P.│do.   │  21│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 1, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Franklin,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Wilhelm, Leo    │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Williams,       │do.   │  33│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Charles       │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Williamson, John│do.   │  20│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  22, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Wirts, Samuel   │do.   │  23│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., for wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Wolf, John      │do.   │  22│Aug. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Wood, William A.│do.   │  20│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  F, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Aug. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN JOHN W. BULLOCK._
]


                               COMPANY E.

    Mustered in Oct. 31, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by Charles C.
     Goddard, Captain 17th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9,
        1865, at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th
            Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d
                       Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 John W. Bullock │Capt. │  39│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Major
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 20, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  but not
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Thomas J. Carran│1st   │  21│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned Jan. 10,
                 │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1864.
 Terence A.      │do.   │  25│Sept. 19, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
   Dempsey       │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. D
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed Dec. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Orrin Story     │2d Lt.│  28│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Resigned Aug. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Charles E. Wyman│1st   │  19│Sept. 3, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 2d
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Lieutenant May
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1864, but
                 │      │    │              │        │  not mustered; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Sept. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Herbert A. Smith│do.   │  18│Aug. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Josiah Flick    │Ser.  │  20│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 William Carran  │do.   │  18│Sept. 20, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died June 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Frederick L.    │do.   │  20│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb. 6,
   Smith         │      │    │              │        │  1865, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Edward M.       │do.   │  20│Oct. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   Hayhurst      │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Thomas G.       │do.   │  18│Sept. 8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Hayhurst      │      │    │              │        │  July 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Hartsel Herriff │do.   │  18│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Nathan R.       │do.   │  22│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Reduced to ranks
   Parmaly       │      │    │              │        │  from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Jas. B.         │Sergt.│  23│Sept. 28, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Hardenburgh   │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Feb. 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George F. Hill  │Corp. │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
                 │      │    │              │        │  13, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 James Larkin    │Corp. │  19│Oct. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Matthew J.      │do.   │  21│Sept. 22, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed July 1,
   Plunkett      │      │    │              │        │  1863; died Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rebel Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Ira Wade        │do.   │  21│April 25, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Appointed July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; killed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 19, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Chester D.      │do.   │  28│Aug. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Nov. 1,
   Springer      │      │    │              │        │  1864; died Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1864, of
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounds received
                 │      │    │              │        │  in battle.
 Peter Parsch    │do.   │  20│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Isaac Warren    │do.   │  30│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Marion Shepherd │do.   │  18│Sept. 16, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Harold A. Cores │do.   │  18│April 20, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Feb. 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Jacob Sholl     │do.   │  18│May 15, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Feb. 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Mengo H.        │do.   │  18│Dec. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
   Diefendorff   │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Henry Holzhaner │do.   │  20│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Alexander       │do.   │  18│Jan. 2, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
   Herbret       │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John C. Kollman │do.   │  27│Sept. 10, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Frank Hartman   │Mus.  │  18│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Henry J. Wilber │do.   │  32│Sept. 1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 William Andres  │Wag.  │  21│Oct. 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Allaman, Albert │Priv. │  18│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Alway, Henry    │do.   │  19│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Anderson, James │do.   │  42│Sept. 8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Atkinson,       │do.   │  39│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   William       │      │    │              │        │
 Austin, Richard │do.   │  20│Sept. 15, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps April 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Baker, Thomas   │do.   │  19│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Bennett, William│do.   │  29│Sept. 24, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Benson, James   │do.   │  32│Oct. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Bowman. Alfred  │do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B Jan. 1, 1863.
 Bowman, John M. │Priv. │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. B——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 30, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Brandt, William │do.   │  18│May 23, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Burell, Duff G. │do.   │  28│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Burket, Peter   │do.   │  44│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  13, 1865, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Butler, John    │do.   │  18│May 16, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Captured Jan. 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Dandridge,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  exchanged——.
 Cain, Edwin C.  │do.   │  34│Sept. 20, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 5, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Louisville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ky.
 Cender, Andrew  │do.   │  22│May 22, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Chandler,       │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 14,
   Matthew T.    │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Chappel, James, │do.   │  45│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Sr.           │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Chappel, James, │do.   │  21│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed June 23,
   Jr.           │      │    │              │        │  1864, at Kenesaw
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mountain, Ga.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  while on picket
                 │      │    │              │        │  duty.
 Clark, Jewitt   │do.   │  45│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tullahoma, Tenn.
 Clark, Legrand  │do.   │  21│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 18,
   P.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.
 Clark, Major E. │do.   │  45│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Murfreesboro,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Cole, Lucius E. │do.   │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced to ranks
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 12, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Georgia.
 Crew, John      │do.   │  20│Nov. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out May 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Crocker, Myron  │do.   │  45│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died March 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Dahlem, Lucius  │do.   │  19│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Darron,         │do.   │  45│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Alexander     │      │    │              │        │  Co. H Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Elsner, Martin  │do.   │  26│Dec. 23, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 24, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Emmons, Alonzo  │do.   │  24│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
   J.            │      │    │              │        │
 Ernst, George   │do.   │  18│Sept. 14, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Estell, Ambrose │do.   │  38│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal.
 Eukers, Samuel  │do.   │  18│May 12, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Captured May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 9, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rebel Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Farnsworth,     │do    │  35│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │See Co. C.
   Civilian O.   │      │    │              │        │
 Fields, Adam    │do.   │  18│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  26, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Fisher, Silas   │Priv. │  27│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Fuller, Moses   │do.   │  38│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B Jan. 1, 1863.
 Garrett, Erastus│do.   │  34│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 4,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Haines, Jacob   │do.   │  27│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B Jan. 1, 1863.
 Harpon, John W. │do.   │  18│Feb. 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Hoffer, Charles │do.   │  35│Dec. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Hollingsworth,  │do.   │  20│Dec. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   John          │      │    │              │        │
 Houghton,       │do.   │  34│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Christop'r    │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Jameson, John   │do.   │  35│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. H Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Johnson, Nathan │do.   │  33│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
   F.            │      │    │              │        │
 Knerim, Oswelt  │do.   │  19│Oct. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of
                 │      │    │              │        │  accidental
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounds.
 Lawless, William│do.   │  21│July 6, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Leonard, Ryal W.│do.   │  28│Oct. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Lewis, Hiram    │do.   │  21│May 25, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  15, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Fort
                 │      │    │              │        │  Independence,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Boston Harbor,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mass.
 Lucas, Johnson  │do.   │  35│Sept. 8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Missing Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; supposed to
                 │      │    │              │        │  have been
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed.
 McDowell,       │do.   │  45│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
   William T.    │      │    │              │        │  25, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.
 McGuire, James  │do.   │  25│Oct. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Maynes, Jared F.│do.   │  35│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B Jan. 1, 1863.
 Miller, John    │do.   │  30│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; wounded
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 25, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in action;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Camp Chase,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Miller, Henry   │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D Jan. 1, 1863.
 Miller, Silas F.│do.   │  22│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Mogler, Louis   │do.   │  24│May 22, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Moon, Charles E.│do.   │  18│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 7, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Moore, Henry    │do.   │  18│Sept. 24, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability; on
                 │      │    │              │        │  muster-in rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Henry Moon.
 Naracong, Riley │do.   │  35│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Nimmons, John S.│do.   │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Sergt.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Major Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Parker, Zenas D.│do.   │  18│April 18, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Died Sept. 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Penny,          │do.   │  18│Oct.  1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Christopher   │      │    │              │        │  D Jan. 1. 1863.
 Reed, Richard   │Priv. │  18│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E, 12th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 21, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Washington,
                 │      │    │              │        │  D. C., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Remengoburg,    │do.   │  19│May 19, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 27,
   Carrollton    │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Roper, Orlando  │do.   │  20│Oct.  1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   S.            │      │    │              │        │
 Rourke, Michael │do.   │  38│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Captured March 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lancaster, S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C.; paroled——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 24, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Camp Chase,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Ryan, John      │do.   │  24│Nov. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Shamburger,     │do.   │  21│May  22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
   Jacob         │      │    │              │        │
 Shay, William   │do.   │  18│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; to Co. B,
                 │      │    │              │        │  22d Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, April 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Smith, Alvarado │do.   │  18│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died March 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Snow, Edwin W.  │do.   │  18│Dec.  8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Spangler, Peter │do.   │  34│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Stagmire, John  │do.   │  33│May  18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B, 23d Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 19, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Clinton,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Iowa.
 Stoner, William │do.   │  27│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  26, 1862, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Sullivan, James │do.   │  18│April 21, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Sutton, Jacob   │do.   │  18│April 24, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Swartwood,      │do.   │  23│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Feb. 14,
   DeWitt        │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Sweeny, James   │do.   │  18│May  11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1864, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Thayer, James K.│do.   │  22│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Thomas, James   │do.   │  18│May   9, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Tousley, Charles│do.   │  19│Sept.  1, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died Sept. 25,
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Turner, George  │do.   │  18│April 23, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Van Osdal, James│do.   │  18│Nov. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │See Co. G.
 Waters, Henry F.│do.   │  28│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 6th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 22, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Johnson's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Island, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Wetzell, Anthony│do.   │  24│Sept. 13, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1864, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Wheeler, William│do.   │  28│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B Jan. 1, 1863.
 Williams, Cyrus │Priv. │  42│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Wilson, Frank W.│do    │  45│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Winklepleck,    │do    │  18│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
   Jas. W.       │      │    │              │        │
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN JOHN C. SMITH._
]


                               COMPANY F.

    Mustered in Oct. 31, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by Charles C.
     Goddard, Captain 17th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9,
        1865, at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th
            Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d
                       Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 Horace E. Dakin │Capt. │  31│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned March 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, because of
                 │      │    │              │        │  physical
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Sherburn B.     │do    │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   Eaton         │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant and
                 │      │    │              │        │  Adjutant May 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; resigned
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 4, 1864.
 John C. Smith   │do    │  33│Mch. 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 23, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Andrew J.       │1st   │  33│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned March 4,
   Moulton       │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1863.
 James T.        │do    │  18│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
   McGinnis      │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. H
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Captain Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864.
 John S. Nimmons │do    │  23│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Oliver P.       │2d Lt.│  21│Sept. 1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned June 27,
   McIlrath      │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Denton J. Snider│do    │  22│Feb. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned Sept. 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; also borne
                 │      │    │              │        │  on rolls as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andrew J.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Snyder.
 Haskell F.      │1st   │  20│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 2d
   Proctor       │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. G
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 28, 1863.
 David B. Long   │do    │  23│Aug. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  14, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 John E. Crandal │do    │  35│Aug. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant April
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John W. Crapser │Sergt.│  19│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Jacob Hinebaugh │do    │  30│Sept. 11, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Charles Hammond │do    │  18│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Enoch P.        │do    │  41│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Teachout      │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 27, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Albert Bliss    │Sergt.│  20│Aug. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865
 George Butters  │do    │  21│April 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George S. Dell  │Corp. │  24│Sept. 2, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  24, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  cerficate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Marquis L. Sage │do    │  20│Aug. 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Henry B. Lang   │do    │  18│Sept. 22, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died May 14, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 James V. Smith  │do    │  32│Sept. 9, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Henry Williams  │do    │  18│May 5, 1863   │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Sylvester Adams │do    │  18│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John Bartley    │do    │  34│Dec. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 30, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  also borne on
                 │      │    │              │        │  rolls as John
                 │      │    │              │        │  Bastley.
 Mason Ketchum   │do    │  18│Sept. 9, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed May 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James A. Bowers │do    │  18│May 2, 1863   │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Cisco     │do    │  19│May 6, 1863   │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Lennon    │do    │  18│Feb. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Alfred Curtis   │do    │  21│May 1, 1863   │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 12,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Charles Miller  │Mus.  │  18│Nov. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Samuel Chapman  │do    │  16│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Almond Aiken    │Wag.  │  29│Oct. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Adams, Harry F. │Priv. │  30│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Allen, Ethan    │do    │  18│Sept. 13, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Babb, Adam      │do    │  28│Nov. 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Baird, John W.  │do    │  18│Mch. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Batley, George  │do    │  27│Sept. 21, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Beach, Joseph   │do    │  32│Aug. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Beechan, Joseph │Priv. │  19│Jan. 27, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 5, 1864,
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Belden, John    │do    │  19│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Bennett, Robert │do    │  20│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Captured Sept. 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in action;
                 │      │    │              │        │  died March 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Richmond,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Virginia.
 Briggs, Stephen │do    │  42│April 28, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
   S.            │      │    │              │        │
 Bromley, David  │do    │  22│Oct. 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Nov. 1, 1862.
 Buckhart, Samuel│do    │  23│Oct. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862.
 Buckley, Hugh   │do    │  40│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Burnett, Isaac  │do    │  24│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Cahil, Peter F. │do    │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D June 1, 1863.
 Chapman, Henry  │do    │  40│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Chapman, Henry  │do    │  18│Dec. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  31, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Clark, Thomas   │do    │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Nov. 1, 1862.
 Coats, Charles  │do    │  19│Dec. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Cooley, George  │do    │  35│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Coramy, Joseph  │do    │  18│Oct. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Crosby, William │do    │  23│April 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Crossland,      │do    │  25│Mch. 5, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Leonidas N.   │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Daub, Peter     │do    │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D ——.
 Dinges, Adam    │do    │  29│April 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Elliott, Eugene │do    │  22│Oct. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  A Nov. 1, 1862.
 Etter, James    │do    │  18│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Forsythe, Levi  │do    │  23│Sept. 15, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged to date
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 29, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Goodrich, James │do    │  19│Oct. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Graham, Elijah  │do    │  23│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   G.            │      │    │              │        │
 Grobe, Christian│do    │  18│Sept. 11, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 9, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Hardy, John     │do    │  19│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Hart, Jehu      │do    │  41│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 2, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in Rebel Prison
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Richmond, Va.
 Hathaway,       │do    │  35│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Baldwin B.    │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1866.
 Hedgeman, David │do    │  22│Sept. 13, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  A Nov. 1, 1862.
 Hennesy, Henry  │do    │  18│Mch. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Hert, Joseph    │do    │  28│Nov. 3, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Hill, Hiram B.  │Priv. │  34│Sept. 28, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st U. S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Holden, Joseph  │do.   │  18│Dec. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Holden, Thomas  │do.   │  18│Sept. 28, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  29, 1863.
 Hollahan, John  │do.   │  25│Sept. 13, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Hufton, William │do.   │  18│Sept. 9, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Hunter, Adolphus│do.   │  18│Sept. 20, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  2, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 James, Francis  │do.   │  20│Sept. 22, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Jones, Alexander│do.   │  23│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Absent. No further
   K.            │      │    │              │        │  record found.
 Jones, Carlos D.│do.   │  18│Jan. 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Jones, Edward   │do.   │  18│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Jones, Franklin │do.   │  18│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863.
 Konzen, Henry   │do.   │  20│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Nov. 1, 1862.
 Lashels, George │do.   │  22│Sept. 22, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Lewis, Richard  │do.   │  28│April 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Litchfield,     │do.   │  35│Aug. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug. 5,
   Francis       │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 McGuire, Thomas │do.   │  30│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D ——.
 McKay,          │do.   │  24│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Florentine    │      │    │              │        │  D ——.
 Mahannah, Morris│do.   │  18│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Matthews, Frank │do.   │  25│Jan. 10, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out Aug.
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  5, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Springfield,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ill., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Meredith,       │do.   │  26│Sept. 11, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
   Anthony       │      │    │              │        │  10, 1862, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Miller, John    │do.   │  45│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Wagoner;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1863.
 Miller, Tyler R.│do.   │  21│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Mitchell, John  │do.   │  22│Mch. 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Captured Jan. 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Blaine's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cross Roads,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn. No further
                 │      │    │              │        │  record found.
 Moller, Frank   │do.   │  23│Sept. 11, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged June
                 │      │    │              │        │  22, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Mooney, Daniel  │do.   │  25│Sept. 15, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Myer, William   │do.   │  29│Sept. 1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Nicholas, Peter │do.   │  18│Feb. 27, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 O'Mara, John    │do.   │  43│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863.
 Ranney, Charles │do.   │  23│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Rexinger, Joseph│Priv. │  44│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Joseph
                 │      │    │              │        │  Reisinger;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862.
 Riggor, Philip  │do.   │  39│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Philip
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regor;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862.
 Ross, John      │do.   │  28│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Rowe, Amandus   │do.   │  19│Sept. 26, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died June 6, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in Rebel Prison
                 │      │    │              │        │  at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Ryan, Michael   │do.   │  18│May 15, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sabin, Byron N. │do.   │  20│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Schmidt,        │do.   │  31│Oct. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded May 27,
   Christopher   │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills. Ga.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  13, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cincinnati, O.
 Seaber, Alfred  │do.   │  18│Sept. 22, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   N.            │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Segmire, Jacob  │do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  A ——.
 Sherman, Daniel │do.   │  24│Sept. 9, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Shutliff, Gordon│do.   │  29│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  A Nov. 1, 1862.
 Snider, William │do.   │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D ——.
 Spellman, Henry │do.   │  22│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Sperry, Sherman │do.   │  18│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 14, 1863.
 Stabler,        │do.   │  44│Feb. 22, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Christian     │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Stark, James    │do.   │  29│Aug. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Steller,        │do.   │  18│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
   Christian     │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Stewart, James  │do.   │  36│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G ——.
 Stone, George   │do.   │  29│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 1, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Knoxville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tennessee.
 Thoma, John     │do.   │  18│Oct. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Rocky Face
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Georgia.
 Thomas, Peter   │do.   │  19│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Waltham, Thomas │do.   │  32│Sept. 16, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 28, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Washington,
                 │      │    │              │        │  D. C.
 Warner, Marshall│do.   │  21│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
   C.            │      │    │              │        │  15, 1862, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Weiddart,       │do.   │  35│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Frederick     │      │    │              │        │
 Westerman,      │do.   │  23│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Joseph        │      │    │              │        │  G Nov. 1, 1862.
 Wheeler, Lucius │do.   │  27│Sept. 10, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Captured ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 1, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rebel Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Belle Isle, Va.
 Wheeler, Matthew│do.   │  27│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  Corporal.
 Whitney, Nathan │do.   │  18│Sept. 24, 1862│ 3 yrs. │See Co. G.
 Williams, George│do.   │  33│Nov. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   H.            │      │    │              │        │
 Williams, James │do.   │  29│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  A Nov. 1, 1862.
 Young, John     │do.   │  22│Mch. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Chase, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Zerly, John H.  │do.   │  22│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  A Nov. 1, 1862.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN JOHN RAIDAIE._
]


                               COMPANY G.

  Mustered in from Nov. 20 to Dec. 31, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by
      Charles C. Goddard, Captain 17th Infantry, and C. O. Howard,
       Captain 18th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9, 1865,
        at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th Ohio
          Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d Division,
                            4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 William A.      │Capt. │  28│Nov. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned April 23,
   Powell        │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 John Raidaie    │do.   │  28│July 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. B
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Brennan   │1st   │  30│Nov. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned May 1,
                 │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1863.
 John B. Irwin   │do.   │  21│Nov. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant from
                 │      │    │              │        │  2d Lieutenant to
                 │      │    │              │        │  date April 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; to Captain
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. C to date
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 10, 1863.
 Hashell F.      │do.   │  20│July 26, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 2d
   Proctor       │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant from
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Sergeant Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  F April 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Adjutant Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  26, 1865.
 Charles D.      │do.   │  18│Aug. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Hammer        │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  and Adjutant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 26, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. B June 3,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Alvan S.        │1st   │  22│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
   Galbraith     │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. I
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 19, 1863.
 John R. Lemon   │do.   │  24│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John K.         │Sergt.│  25│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed 1st
   Batcheldor    │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 3, 1863.
 Thomas Burke    │do.   │  27│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 7,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 John Boyle      │do.   │  44│Mch. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps May 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Joseph Sherman  │do.   │  21│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Frank Waltz     │do.   │  23│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  from private Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Carsena Cutler  │do.   │  32│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 6, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Oct. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Frank Sanders   │do.   │  18│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Oct. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William Cutler  │Corp. │  19│Oct. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 William Couch   │do.   │  23│Oct. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 James Condon    │do.   │  27│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Archibald J.    │Corp. │  35│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   Remington     │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 William L. Reed │do.   │  24│April 10, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Appointed July 25,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George Reichart │do.   │  21│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Jan 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 David Bromley   │do.   │  22│Oct. 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William Collins │do.   │  19│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Oct. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Boston Gilson   │do.   │  21│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Oct. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Joseph Westerman│do.   │  23│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Oct. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Christopher     │do.   │  18│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
   Herwig        │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Henry Konzer    │do.   │  20│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Jacob Westerman │Wag.  │  24│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. C Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Wagoner ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Allinger, John  │Priv. │  18│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 3, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mission Ridge,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tennessee.
 Alway, Henry    │do.   │  19│Oct. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863.
 Baird, Alexander│do.   │  39│April 10, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Ball, William   │do.   │  21│Mch. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 13,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Blecker, John   │do.   │  22│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as John N.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Becker.
 Bonney, William │do.   │  44│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  23, 1863.
 Bray, Richard G.│do.   │  44│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1863.
 Buckmaster,     │do.   │  22│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Marion        │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863.
 Burgess, William│do.   │  24│Oct. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal.
 Camp, William   │do.   │  20│Nov. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Cheney, Leander │do.   │  20│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 3, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Clark, Thomas   │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Crew, John      │do.   │  20│Nov. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  company E Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1863.
 Cushing,        │Priv. │  30│Nov. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Hamilton      │      │    │              │        │  I ——.
 Davis, John I.  │do.   │  18│Nov. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Davis, William  │do.   │  30│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Decker, Samuel  │do.   │  43│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I ——.
 Desmon, Timothy │do.   │  21│Nov. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Ellenwood,      │do.   │  24│Aug. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Andrew        │      │    │              │        │  Co. C Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Evans, George   │do.   │  27│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec. 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Fairbanks,      │do.   │  30│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Samuel        │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Fallen, Owen    │do.   │  24│Sept. 1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. C Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; died March
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Finnigan, James │do.   │  27│Nov. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Fisher, George  │do.   │  25│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
   W.            │      │    │              │        │
 Fox, John       │do.   │  24│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Wagoner.
 Fudrow,         │do.   │  18│April 17, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Christopher   │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Gaffney, James  │do.   │  21│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Goodman, William│do.   │  31│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to ——,
                 │      │    │              │        │  23d Regiment
                 │      │    │              │        │  Kentucky
                 │      │    │              │        │  Infantry
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteers, Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  11, 1863.
 Groochee, Joseph│do.   │  26│Nov. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863.
 Hatfield, James │do.   │  28│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant.
 Hayes, Burton   │do.   │  29│April 16, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863.
 Hennessey, James│do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  H Jan. 1, 1863.
 Horsley, Charles│do.   │  25│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 King, Robert    │do.   │  23│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O.
 Konzen, George  │do.   │  26│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; died April
                 │      │    │              │        │  23, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Kullmer, Charles│do.   │  22│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   J.            │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  captured Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at Camp
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chase, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Charles J.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Kullick.
 Lalumiere,      │do.   │  18│Oct. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 28,
   Alphonse      │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Manchester,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Alphonse
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lallamire.
 Lloyd, James L. │do.   │  22│Mch. 27, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  21, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Lyndon, John    │do.   │  43│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.
 McConnell, John │do.   │  18│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounded May 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, inaction;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 McCormick, John │do.   │  22│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D Jan. 1, 1863.
 Mace, George L. │do.   │  22│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mangouse, Felix │do.   │  19│Oct. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Mentzer, Nelson │Priv. │  18│Oct. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Miller, Charles │do.   │  18│Nov. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  company F Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1863.
 Miller, Hugh    │do.   │  20│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Miller, John    │do.   │  20│Nov. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863.
 Mitchell, Raven │do.   │  21│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   R.            │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  4, 1863.
 Moyer, Jacob    │do.   │  33│Oct. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Detailed as
                 │      │    │              │        │  teamster from
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 1, 1863, to
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Moyer, John     │do.   │  22│Nov. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Myron, John     │do.   │  40│Nov. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863.
 Neff, Frank     │do.   │  18│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D Jan. 1, 1863.
 Nelson, Francis │do.   │  18│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Oct. 6, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Obernour,       │do.   │  26│Oct. 23, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Frederick     │      │    │              │        │  Co. C Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; died April
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Parker, William │do.   │  19│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   M.            │      │    │              │        │  H Jan. 1, 1863.
 Peacock, Charles│do.   │  44│Oct. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July 6,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Peron, Francis  │do.   │  22│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Phalen, James   │do.   │  34│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1863.
 Phelps, John    │do.   │  25│Nov. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  H Jan. 1, 1863.
 Pierre, Eugene  │do.   │  22│Oct. 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Pollock, William│do.   │  15│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Rauch, George   │do.   │  18│April 14, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Reiger, George  │do.   │  31│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. C Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; detailed
                 │      │    │              │        │  as teamster from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 8, 1864, to
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Rexinger, Joseph│do.   │  44│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; to Co. G,
                 │      │    │              │        │  5th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 18, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Indianapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind.
 Rigger, Philip  │do.   │  39│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 30, 1864.
 Riley, James    │do.   │  19│Nov. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Shay, William   │do.   │  18│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863.
 Sheltz, John    │do.   │  21│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Marion        │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863.
 Shine, Thomas   │do.   │  23│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Shirkley,       │do.   │  28│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
   Matthew       │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Shook, John     │do.   │  18│Dec. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Shurtlif, Nelson│do.   │  40│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Sinclair, John  │Priv. │  27│Oct. 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  Corporal.
 Smith, Frank    │do.   │  21│Dec. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Stevens, Hiram  │do.   │  43│April 17, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Stewart, James  │do.   │  36│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. F ——.
 Stewart, John   │do.   │  25│Dec. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Sullivan,       │do.   │  32│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Cornelius     │      │    │              │        │
 Terry, John     │do.   │  28│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Nov. 22,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Mission
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Tenn.
 Tomkins, Judson │do.   │  18│Sept. 27, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician.
 Vandemark,      │do.   │  20│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Alex'd'r      │      │    │              │        │  B Jan 1, 1863.
 Vanorsdal, James│do.   │  19│Nov. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Wade, Thomas    │do.   │  25│April 14, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Watson, Andrew  │do.   │  26│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  D Jan. 1, 1863.
 Welsh, Patrick  │do.   │  28│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863.
 Weston, Charles │do.   │  25│Dec. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. I Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Whiting, Nathan │do.   │  18│Sept. 24, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Wideman, Charles│do.   │  19│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Wiseman, Levi   │do.   │  22│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Young, George   │do.   │  25│Oct. 23, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Young, Marshall │do.   │  35│Nov. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN EBEN S. COE._
]


                               COMPANY H.

    Mustered in Nov. 18, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by Charles C.
     Goddard, Captain 17th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9,
        1865, at Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th
            Ohio Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d
                       Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 Eben S. Coe     │Capt. │  27│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Lieut.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Colonel 196th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment, O. V.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I., March 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 John Stevens    │do.   │  34│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant from
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Sergeant Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C May 20, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. B
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Captain March
                 │      │    │              │        │  29, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Barrett W.      │1st   │  23│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Resigned June 11,
   Kerfoot       │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 William Hannon  │do.   │  41│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  private;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  21, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  2, 1863; to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  7, 1863; to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Captain Co. B
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 18, 1865.
 James T.        │2d Lt.│  18│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
   McGinnis      │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. F
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1863.
 Samuel B. Payne │do.   │  21│June 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 8, 1864.
 Arthur D. Bailey│1st   │  23│Sept. 10, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
                 │Ser.  │    │              │        │
 Terence Dempsey │do.   │  25│Sept. 19, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. D
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 22, 1863.
 Thomas J. Crooks│do.   │  18│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  wounded Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; transferred
                 │      │    │              │        │  to 152d Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, March 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Samuel P. Fulton│do.   │  24│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  private;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. C
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 23, 1865.
 Andrew Holt     │do.   │  33│Oct. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  private;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Charles D.      │do.   │  19│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Collins       │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 8, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to Com.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Wm. B. Dodsworth│do.   │  20│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  9, 1865; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George S. Greene│Sergt.│  23│Sept. 25, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Henry E. Lowry  │do.   │  18│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed Sergt.
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; killed Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Nelson Lent     │do.   │  25│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed Sergt.
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; killed Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 John Doyle      │do.   │  22│Oct. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 10, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Isaac S. Moore  │do.   │  20│Oct. 5, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 George Labaree  │do.   │  33│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 David Quick     │do.   │  20│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant May 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Dillon    │Sergt.│  32│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James Powell    │Corp. │  41│Sept. 16, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to Com.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Dec. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862.
 Lyman H. Batz   │do.   │  22│Oct. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  also on roll as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lyman H. Bates.
 Samuel H.       │do.   │  21│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——; died
   Harrison      │      │    │              │        │  July, 24 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Manchester,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Lawson Lambert  │do.   │  35│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 14, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Manchester,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 William M.      │do.   │  19│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
   Parker        │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; captured
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 19, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; died Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  11, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rebel Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 William Caldwell│do.   │  25│Oct. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  captured Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; died Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  Rebel Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 William H. Smith│do.   │  21│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. H, 11th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, April 23,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out as Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 19, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Albany, N. Y.
 Thomas McHoes   │do.   │  24│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Allen Blothen   │do.   │  22│Sept. 23, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Robert N. Denham│do.   │  18│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Eugene M. Coudry│do.   │  19│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Horace A.       │do.   │  22│Oct. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 9,
   Whitney       │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James M. Painter│do.   │  18│Oct. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John A. Kingman │do.   │  18│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed May 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William M.      │do.   │  18│Oct. 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 10,
   Connolly      │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Henry McKinnon  │Mus.  │  19│Sept. 23, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to 7th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Aug. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Major Amy       │do.   │  15│Sept. 19, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Jonathan Wright │Wag.  │  45│Sept. 19, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Joel Brooks     │Wag.  │  28│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Barber, Gardner │Priv. │  45│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.
 Barnes, Trace L.│do.   │  33│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C Jan. 1, 1863.
 Bartlett, Joseph│do.   │  18│Sept. 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Bear, Henry     │do.   │  42│Oct. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Covington, Ky.
 Berger, Louis   │do.   │  21│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Brooks, George  │do.   │  25│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  U. S. Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  24, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Burns, William  │do.   │  34│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Bushnell, Jason │do.   │  35│Sept. 26, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Caldwell, Adam  │do.   │  21│Nov. 12, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Camp, Charles D.│do.   │  18│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Carr, Robert    │do.   │  18│May 25, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Clark, Samuel   │do.   │  30│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Sept. 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Dangerfield,    │do.   │  20│Oct. 27, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 4, 1863,
   Edward        │      │    │              │        │  at Cleveland, O.
 Darron,         │do.   │  45│Sept. 26, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   Alexander     │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863.
 Deitz, William  │do.   │  20│Oct. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  F, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Aug. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Devan, Charles  │do.   │  35│Sept. 18, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Died March 9,
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Drake, Frank    │do.   │  23│Mch. 29, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Duffey, John    │do.   │  25│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Dufour, Napoleon│do.   │  18│Dec. 5, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Dunning, Daniel │do.   │  43│Nov. 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   N.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Earl, Henry     │do.   │  25│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Ellsner, Henry  │do.   │  26│Dec. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Ewing, Markal   │do.   │  40│Oct. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Feoht, Emil     │do.   │  31│Dec. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Fisher, John    │do.   │  40│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Foot, John A.   │do.   │  19│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
                 │      │    │              │        │  7, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.
 Francis, Julius │do.   │  28│Dec. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Fridley, Andrew │do.   │  44│May 25, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Goble, Darwin S.│do.   │  23│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died March 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Franklin, Tenn.
 Granel, Peter R.│do.   │  41│Sept. 13, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Hospital Steward
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 19, 1862.
 Green, John     │do.   │  28│Sept. 15, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Gregory, Charles│do.   │  18│Dec. 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 14,
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.
 Hamilton,       │Priv. │  33│Dec. 25, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
   William B.    │      │    │              │        │
 Harvey, Jacob R.│do.   │  23│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out July
                 │      │    │              │        │  2, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Hays, James     │do.   │  27│Nov. 26, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hennessey, James│do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 10, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Herrick, Leo    │do.   │  20│Sept. 30, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Hewey, Peter    │do.   │  21│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Hurly, John C.  │do.   │  30│Sept. 24, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Captured May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 1, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in Rebel Prison
                 │      │    │              │        │  at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Hyland, James   │do.   │  18│Dec. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Jamison, John   │do.   │  35│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863.
 Johnson, James  │do.   │  40│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   M.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Johnston, Thomas│do.   │  26│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  F, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Aug. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Jones, Thomas H.│do.   │  18│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Kamp, Samuel    │do.   │  33│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Oct. 10,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1863, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Kane, John      │do.   │  33│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Karker, Jacob H.│do.   │  20│Dec. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Jacob
                 │      │    │              │        │  H. Barker;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Koll, Andrew    │do.   │  37│Sept. 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 La Fayette,     │do.   │  24│Sept. 24, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Felix         │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Lally, Michael  │do.   │  43│Nov. 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Lucas, Reeves   │do.   │  18│Oct. 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 McBain, Bruce D.│do.   │  20│Nov. 25, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 McCabe, James   │do.   │  28│Sept. 10, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 McCafferty,     │do.   │  19│Dec. 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   William       │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 McCarty, Patrick│do.   │  18│Dec. 28, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 McCluskey, John │do.   │  28│Dec. 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 McDermot, John  │do.   │  35│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 1, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Mahanna, Thomas │do.   │  19│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Matterson, Andy │do.   │  22│Oct. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B, 1st Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  U. S. Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  16, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Mitchell, Joseph│Priv. │  20│Dec. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Mooney, John    │do.   │  44│Sept. 3, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Dec. 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863.
 Moore, Franklin │do.   │  25│April 4, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Moore, Peter    │do.   │  20│Nov. 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Murray, Patrick │do.   │  36│Oct. 29, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out July
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Nagle, John     │do.   │  44│Oct. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  23, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Neice, Boltin   │do.   │  24│Oct. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Nicholson,      │do.   │  29│Sept. 17, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   William       │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 17, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to Q.
                 │      │    │              │        │  M. Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced to ranks
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. H April 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; killed May
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1864, in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pickett's Mills,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.; borne on
                 │      │    │              │        │  muster-in roll
                 │      │    │              │        │  as William
                 │      │    │              │        │  Vicholson.
 Noel, Philip    │do.   │  18│Dec. 5, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.
 O'Donnell,      │do.   │  35│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Patrick       │      │    │              │        │
 Ohl, Casper     │do.   │  28│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Pelkey, John    │do.   │  32│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Pendegrass,     │do.   │  19│Sept. 23, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
   James         │      │    │              │        │
 Pepperday,      │do.   │  27│Oct. 6, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   William H.    │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged as
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  15, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Phelps, John    │do.   │  25│Nov. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Price, Peter    │do.   │  18│Oct. 8, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Reed, John H.   │do.   │  44│Oct. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Roberts, John   │do.   │  41│June 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Roberts, Richard│do.   │  32│Sept. 26, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
   A.            │      │    │              │        │
 Rogers, William │do.   │  19│Oct. 29, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   B.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Rouch, Matthias │do.   │  31│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Ryan, James     │do.   │  38│Nov. 2, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ryan, John      │do.   │  22│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Madison, Ind.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Ryer, Edward C. │do.   │  25│Dec. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Schmith, August │do.   │  23│Dec. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Scritchfield,   │do.   │  19│Dec. 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Daniel        │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Sellers, David  │do.   │  20│Dec. 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 2, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received May 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action.
 Shampeaux,      │do.   │  26│April 6, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
   Nelson        │      │    │              │        │
 Shewark, Joseph │do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Captured Sept. 1,
   E.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, near Poe's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tavern, Tenn.:
                 │      │    │              │        │  died Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Richmond., Va.
 Smith, Charles  │do.   │  28│Sept. 21, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Smith, Samuel B.│Priv. │  25│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  19, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cincinnati, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Spangler, Basil │do.   │  20│Oct. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
   L.            │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant 5th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment, U.S.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Colored
                 │      │    │              │        │  Infantry, Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  17, 1863, from
                 │      │    │              │        │  which mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out Sept. 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Adjutant.
 Spencer,        │do.   │  31│May 21, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 23,
   Jonathan L.   │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Staples, Ephraim│do.   │  20│April 6, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
   G.            │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Stringer, Samuel│do.   │  28│Sept. 8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Sturgis, David  │do.   │  42│Sept. 10, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Suitor, Jacob   │do.   │  34│April 4, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Thomas, Isaac B.│do.   │  19│Oct. 3, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Thompson, John  │do.   │  37│Nov. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Thompson, Robert│do.   │  33│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  2, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Webster, William│do.   │  42│Oct. 27, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Dec.
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  31, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O.
 Wilcox, William │do.   │  35│Mch. 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   W.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Wilkeson, George│do.   │  40│May 27, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Wolf, Michael   │do.   │  20│Dec. 23, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN ALVAN S. GALBRAITH._
]


                               COMPANY I.

   Mustered in Dec. 30, 1862, at Camp Cleveland, O., by C. O. Howard,
     Captain 18th Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9, 1865, at
          Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th Ohio
               Veteran Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d
                       Division, 4th Army Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 James H. Frost  │Capt. │  29│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Dec. 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; killed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 25, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in battle of
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mission Ridge,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Alvan S.        │do.   │  22│Sept. 12, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
   Galbraith     │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant from
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Sergeant Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G March 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; to Captain
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 27, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Anthony Caldwell│1st   │  32│Sept. 18, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed Dec. 2,
                 │Lt.   │    │              │        │  1862; resigned
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 19, 1863.
 Charles E. Wyman│do.   │  19│Sept. 3, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. E
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commanded Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  from Sept. 17 to
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1864, and
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. E from Oct.
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864, to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 11, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  also Co. K from
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 4 to July
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Albert H. Lewis │2d Lt.│  20│Dec. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Resigned March 13,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  recommissioned
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Lieutenant
                 │      │    │              │        │  and appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regt.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Quartermaster to
                 │      │    │              │        │  date Dec. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862. See Field
                 │      │    │              │        │  and Staff.
 John C. Smith   │do    │  33│Mch. 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864.
 Jackson V.      │1st   │  24│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Phillips      │Ser.  │    │              │        │  private;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Enos Halsey     │do    │  40│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 20, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Aug. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; promoted
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Q. M.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865.
 Charles E.      │do    │  38│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
   Warren        │      │    │              │        │  April —, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  promoted to 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. K
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 23, 1865.
 James M. Laird  │do    │  28│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 30, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Sergeant May
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Thomas Dickson. │Ser.  │  40│Nov. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  private Dec. 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 1, 1863, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dept.
 Samuel H. Gagus │do    │  20│Aug. 11, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Dec. 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1862; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 3, 1864, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 James Cannell   │do    │  27│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  died Oct. 4,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action at Rocky
                 │      │    │              │        │  Face Ridge, Ga.
 Albert Witherel │do    │  33│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Dec.
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced to ranks
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John G. Rappe   │do    │  36│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 8, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George W. Johns │do    │  18│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  —— Sergeant May
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Samuel B. Johns │do    │  19│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John E. Murphy  │Corp. │  24│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Oct. 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 John McCune     │do    │  19│Oct. 28, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  killed May 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1804, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Pickett's
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mills, Ga.
 Nicholas Wolfe  │do    │  22│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  I, 1st Regiment.
                 │      │    │              │        │  U. S. Veteran
                 │      │    │              │        │  Volunteer
                 │      │    │              │        │  Engineers, Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  11, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War Dept.
 John Coyle      │Priv. │  24│Aug. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed from
                 │      │    │              │        │  teamster ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Valentine Weber │do.   │  21│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Oct. 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George Trehara  │do.   │  22│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 5,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John P. Butts   │do.   │  27│Oct. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 30, 1862;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced to ranks
                 │      │    │              │        │  ——; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal March
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Oscar Meade     │do.   │  40│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Aug. 8,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Hamilton Cushing│do.   │  30│Nov. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal March
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William Calvert │do.   │  21│Oct. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed May 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 George P.       │do.   │  24│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 10,
   Stafford      │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 James C. White  │Mus.  │  37│Nov. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Principal
                 │      │    │              │        │  Musician June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Battle, Barney  │Priv. │  22│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │
 Beecher, Charles│do.   │  21│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Boone, William  │do.   │  17│Oct. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 26, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Washington,
                 │      │    │              │        │  D. C., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Bowlby, Samuel  │do.   │  26│Dec. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Byrne, John     │do.   │  32│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Cahn, Jacob     │do.   │  21│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Jacob
                 │      │    │              │        │  Kahn; discharged
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 27, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Cavenaugh,      │do.   │  28│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   Patrick       │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Chrippendale,   │do.   │  18│Sept. 20, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Chas.         │      │    │              │        │  Musician;
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Kentucky
                 │      │    │              │        │  Infantry June
                 │      │    │              │        │  25, 1863.
 Chrisman, John  │do.   │  17│Aug. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged June 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Cline, John     │do.   │  18│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Coney, Michael  │do.   │  40│Dec. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Connelly, James │do.   │  21│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged to date
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Corcoran,       │do.   │  18│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   William J.    │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Cordry, John J. │do.   │  33│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Daily, John     │do.   │  30│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps April 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Dale, Columbus  │do.   │  17│Aug. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Decker, Samuel  │Priv. │  43│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. G ——; at
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Dempsey, Dennis │do.   │  45│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  F, 15th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  Aug. 1, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cairo, Ill., by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Dickey, William │do.   │  29│Sept. 1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   H.            │      │    │              │        │
 Edwards, William│do.   │  19│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Elsner, Martin  │do.   │  26│Dec. 23, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E Jan. 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  also borne on
                 │      │    │              │        │  rolls as Martin
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ellstner.
 Ervin, John     │do.   │    │              │        │
 Fiscus, Thomas  │do.   │  32│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Fouts, David    │do.   │  17│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded Dec. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged June
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Frasier, Robert │do.   │  30│Oct. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  8, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Gunnison, James │do.   │  33│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Hall, John      │do.   │  23│Nov. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Hannen, James   │do.   │  26│Oct. 29, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Hannen, John    │do.   │  19│Nov. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Hedges, James   │do.   │  26│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Discharged April
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1863, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Hoffer, George  │do.   │  40│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Howard, Henry   │do.   │  18│Nov. 24, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Jenkins, William│do.   │  23│Sept. 20, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
   H.            │      │    │              │        │  152d Co., 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Battalion,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Jan. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Johnson, Enoch  │do.   │  18│Oct. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Johnson, Henry  │do.   │  28│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Absent ——. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 Johnson, Solomon│do.   │  41│Aug. 16, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Jones, John W.  │do.   │  19│Oct. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Jones, William  │do.   │  21│Oct. 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Jones, William  │do.   │  21│Oct. 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   H.            │      │    │              │        │
 Kelly, James    │do.   │  40│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Konzen, George  │do.   │  26│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Leisure, James  │do.   │  20│Oct. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Long, Wesley W. │do.   │  29│Aug. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 McDonal,        │Priv. │  19│Aug. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
   Granville M.  │      │    │              │        │  Granville M.
                 │      │    │              │        │  McDonald; sent
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn. No further
                 │      │    │              │        │  record found.
 McLaughlin,     │do.   │  29│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Patrick       │      │    │              │        │
 McMahan, Philip │do.   │  45│Nov. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  15, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Mills, George W.│do.   │  18│Nov. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Montgomery,     │do.   │  24│Oct. 31, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   William       │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Morton, Henry   │do.   │  21│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Henry
                 │      │    │              │        │  Mertius;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Murphy, Henry   │do.   │  21│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Myers, Peter    │do.   │  45│Sept. 4, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Absent, sick July
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1863. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 Neeley, David   │do.   │  31│Sept. 1, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 O'Brien, Thomas │do.   │  31│Oct. 4, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Price, Joseph R.│do.   │  31│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov.
                 │      │    │              │        │  24, 1863, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Quigley, John   │do.   │  18│Sept. 29, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Reichert, George│do.   │  21│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Riley, Michael  │do.   │  22│Dec. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged May 11,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department; also
                 │      │    │              │        │  borne on rolls
                 │      │    │              │        │  as Michael
                 │      │    │              │        │  Reily.
 Roberts, Erasmus│do.   │  37│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Ryan, Jacob     │do.   │  25│Sept. 30, 1862│ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps May 15,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ryan, James     │do.   │  18│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Ryan, Michael   │do.   │  16│Aug. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out to
                 │      │    │              │        │  date July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Schock, Samuel  │do.   │  34│Oct. 7, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal; died
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 3, 1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Scott, Joseph   │do.   │  28│Nov. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Jan.
                 │      │    │              │        │  20, 1863, on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Shaw, Samuel    │do.   │  35│Sept. 8, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died July 30,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Shook, John     │do.   │  18│Dec. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Simpson, Edward │do.   │  21│Nov. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Absent ——, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 Sprague, George │do.   │  20│Oct. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Stanley, Henry  │do.   │  38│Aug. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │
 Stewart, John   │do.   │  25│Dec. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 Stiger, Charles │do.   │  45│Oct. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged July
                 │      │    │              │        │  11, 1863, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Stocton, James  │do.   │  18│Oct. 20, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Oct. 29,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Sutler, John    │do.   │  35│Nov. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Terry, James    │do.   │  25│Nov. 13, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
 Teveling,       │do.   │  24│Oct. 1, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Died Aug. 5, 1863,
   William       │      │    │              │        │  at Tullahoma,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Toohey, Thomas  │Priv. │  18│Oct. 10, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Tower, Edgar M. │do.   │  21│Nov. 27, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov. 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Weber, August   │do.   │  19│Aug. 25, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Weeks, Lewis R. │do.   │  45│Oct. 14, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Died April 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Welch, Patrick  │do.   │  32│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  2, 1865, by
                 │      │    │              │        │  order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Weston, Charles │do.   │  25│Dec. 30, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  G Jan. 1, 1863.
 White, Sylvester│do.   │  26│Oct. 8, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Returned to Co. G,
                 │      │    │              │        │  59th O. V. I.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 8, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  where he had
                 │      │    │              │        │  previously
                 │      │    │              │        │  enlisted.
 Williams, Peter │do.   │  21│Nov. 21, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   B.            │      │    │              │        │
 Wilson, Albert  │do.   │  31│Dec. 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Woodworth,      │do.   │  24│Dec. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │
   Spencer R.    │      │    │              │        │
 Wren, Edward    │do.   │  27│Nov. 15, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Wykoff, James   │do.   │  19│Oct. 18, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corporal;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Young, Leonidas │do.   │  18│Aug. 17, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  E, 7th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, Sept. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 26,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────

[Illustration:

  _CAPTAIN HIRAM H. MANNING._
]


                               COMPANY K.

  Mustered in from June to September, 1863, at Columbus, O., by A. F.
   Bond, Captain 2d Infantry, U. S. A. Mustered out July 9, 1865, at
      Nashville, Tenn., by Philip Reefy, Captain 19th Ohio Veteran
         Volunteer Infantry and A. C. M. 3d Division, 4th Army
                                 Corps.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 Hiram H. Manning│Capt. │  21│Dec. 2, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. D
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 10, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 William Treat   │1st   │  34│Aug. 9, 1862  │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
                 │Lt.   │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. A
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sept. 3, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed Regt.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Quartermaster
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 5, 1864.
 John C. Smith   │do.   │  33│Mch. 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 2d
                 │      │    │              │        │  Lieutenant Co. 1
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 2, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  to Captain Co. F
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 23, 1865
 Charles E.      │do.   │  38│Aug. 22, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from 1st
   Warren        │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant Co. 1
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 23, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commanded Co. I
                 │      │    │              │        │  from March 9, to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  Adjutant April
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865.
 Frederick       │2d Lt.│  28│Dec. 30, 1861 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted from
   Hagandobler   │      │    │              │        │  Corporal Co. A,
                 │      │    │              │        │  128th O. V. I.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 6, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  commission
                 │      │    │              │        │  returned;
                 │      │    │              │        │  recommissioned
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 1, 1863;
                 │      │    │              │        │  resigned March
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1864.
 Nathan G.       │1st   │  28│Aug. 19, 1862 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred as
   Sutliff       │Ser.  │    │              │        │  Corporal from
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. B Feb. 2,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864; appointed
                 │      │    │              │        │  1st Sergeant
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 22, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 9, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Samuel Shaher   │do.   │  19│June 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1864;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant March
                 │      │    │              │        │  1, 1865; 1st
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Daniel M. Kurtz │Sergt.│  18│June 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Feb. 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 James McDowd    │do.   │  27│Sept. 1, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Charles W.      │do.   │  20│Aug. 12, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed March 1,
   Everett       │      │    │              │        │  1864; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out July 13,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 William Clark   │do.   │  24│June 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  Sergeant June
                 │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Philadelphia,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Pa., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 John Walsh      │Corp. │  41│July 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Oliver Caslin   │do.   │  18│Sept. 3, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John Gibson     │do.   │  28│Aug. 12, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 John J.         │do.   │  32│Aug. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
   Delahunty     │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Orrin Marvin    │do.   │  18│Aug. 31, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Frederick Fowser│do.   │  23│July 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed June 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Charles Brainard│Mus.  │  25│Aug. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Loren Brainard  │do.   │  20│July 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Andrews, John   │Priv. │  20│Aug. 10, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Arn, Nicholas   │do.   │  22│Aug. 24, 1868 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Avery, George   │do.   │  22│June 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Baxter, Hugh    │do.   │  29│July 13, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Birch, William  │do.   │  28│July 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——.
 Brown, James    │do.   │  21│June 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Campbell,       │do.   │  24│July 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
   William       │      │    │              │        │
 Clark, James    │do.   │  20│July 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Rocky Face
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ridge, Ga.
 Clark, John     │Priv. │  18│June 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in Rebel
                 │      │    │              │        │  Prison at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Richmond, Va.
 Clark, William  │do.   │  43│July 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Absent, sick May
   C.            │      │    │              │        │  18, 1864. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 Click, George   │do.   │  19│July 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Connel, John    │do.   │  32│Aug. 31, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 Cotter, William │do.   │  27│June 12, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Coyn, Thomas    │do.   │  19│June 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Dorn, John      │do.   │  18│Sept. 12, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Dorn, Peter     │do.   │  19│Sept. 12, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Dusenberry, John│do.   │  19│              │ 3 yrs. │Returned to Co. K.
                 │      │    │              │        │  32d Regiment O.
                 │      │    │              │        │  V. I., where he
                 │      │    │              │        │  had previously
                 │      │    │              │        │  enlisted.
 Emerick, Charles│do.   │  19│Sept. 2, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Ford, John      │do.   │  34│July 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  12, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Washington, D.
                 │      │    │              │        │  C., on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Fox, John       │do.   │  22│June 14, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Gauntly, Hugh   │do.   │  23│Aug. 31, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 6, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at New Albany,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind.
 Gibson, George  │do.   │  21│May 18, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  K, 5th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 19, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Indianapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Gillet, James   │do.   │  43│June 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Gunshorn,       │do.   │  18│Sept. 12, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   William       │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Haman, David    │do.   │  24│Sept. 14, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as David
                 │      │    │              │        │  Hanan.
 Hamil, Owen     │do.   │  31│Sept. 10, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Orrin
                 │      │    │              │        │  Hummel.
 Hennie, John W. │do.   │  43│Aug. 12, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  31, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Holshocker,     │do.   │  18│Aug. 26, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Lewis         │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Jumont, George  │do.   │  17│Aug. 31, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   R.            │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; also borne
                 │      │    │              │        │  on rolls as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andrew G.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jumout.
 Kearns, William │do.   │  18│June 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov. 7,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., for
                 │      │    │              │        │  minority.
 Lewis, Frank    │do.   │  21│July 23, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Lloyd, John     │do.   │  40│July 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Aug.
                 │      │    │              │        │  18, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Lytle, James W. │do.   │  44│Aug. 10, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to Co.
                 │      │    │              │        │  B, 5th Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 17, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Indianapolis,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ind., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 McDonald, John  │do.   │  32│Aug. 31, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Martin, Joseph  │do.   │  18│July 12, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died March 21,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nashville, Tenn.
 Martin, William │do.   │  35│June 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Mayberry, John  │Priv. │  17│Aug. 27, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Oct. 7,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Mesmer, Andrew  │do.   │  19│Aug. 26, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps Sept. 20,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864.
 Miller, George  │do.   │  25│June 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Miller, John    │do.   │  18│June 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Captured Jan. 18,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in action
                 │      │    │              │        │  near Dandridge,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn. No further
                 │      │    │              │        │  record found.
 Moreland,       │do.   │  41│July 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
   William       │      │    │              │        │
 Morris, William │do.   │  19│Aug. 25, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Morrison, George│do.   │  18│Sept. 2, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps ——:
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 25, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Munson, George  │do.   │  19│Aug. 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Murphy, John    │do.   │  30│June 2, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Naigle, Jacob   │do.   │  41│Jan. 9, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Nieharson, Sage │do.   │  18│July 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov. 7,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., for
                 │      │    │              │        │  minority.
 O'Brien, Martin │do.   │  28│June 6, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 O'Neil, Edward  │do.   │  19│Aug. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 24,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Quin, Martin    │do.   │  36│Sept. 12, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Quinlan, James  │do.   │  30│Aug. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Wounded Dec. 16,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Nashville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out June 27,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Randall, William│do.   │  33│July 1, 1803  │ 3 yrs. │
 Rei, John       │do.   │  21│Aug. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Died June 9, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  in Rebel Prison
                 │      │    │              │        │  at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Andersonville,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Georgia.
 Rutledge, John  │do.   │  20│July 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Santeman,       │do.   │  19│July 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Nov. 7,
   William       │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn., for
                 │      │    │              │        │  minority.
 Saunders, George│do.   │  19│Aug. 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Dec. 9, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Shaub, Jacob    │do.   │  44│July 23, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out June
                 │      │    │              │        │  28, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Chase, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  by order of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Sims, Joseph    │do.   │  30│Aug. 1, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Died Nov. 5, 1863,
                 │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Skill, Charles  │do.   │  22│June 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  Charles Still.
 Snyder, Jacob   │do.   │  44│Jan. 14, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Spencer, Reuben │do.   │  19│Aug. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Appointed Corporal
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 1, 1865;
                 │      │    │              │        │  reduced July 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865; mustered
                 │      │    │              │        │  out with company
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 9, 1865.
 Stewart,        │do.   │  40│July 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed May 14,
   Alexander     │      │    │              │        │  1864, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Resaca, Ga.
 Sutton, William │do.   │  44│June 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Sept.
                 │      │    │              │        │  24, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Teel,           │do.   │  40│Aug. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
   Melanchthon   │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Tefft, William  │do.   │  18│June 3, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Thompson, Thomas│do.   │  38│July 3, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Killed Sept. 19,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, in battle
                 │      │    │              │        │  of Chickamauga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ga.
 Thompson,       │Priv. │  18│July 3, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │Died Feb. 2, 1865,
   William B.    │      │    │              │        │  of wounds
                 │      │    │              │        │  received in
                 │      │    │              │        │  action.
 Venness, William│do.   │  44│July 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as
                 │      │    │              │        │  William Van
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ness:
                 │      │    │              │        │  transferred to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Co. C, 4th
                 │      │    │              │        │  Regiment,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Veteran Reserve
                 │      │    │              │        │  Corps, ——;
                 │      │    │              │        │  mustered out
                 │      │    │              │        │  July 31, 1865,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Springfield,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Ill., by order
                 │      │    │              │        │  of War
                 │      │    │              │        │  Department.
 Waggoner,       │do.   │  24│June 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Discharged March
   Frederick     │      │    │              │        │  10, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Cleveland, O.,
                 │      │    │              │        │  on Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Wallace, Thomas │do.   │  30│Sept. 5, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Absent, sick since
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 3, 1864. No
                 │      │    │              │        │  further record
                 │      │    │              │        │  found.
 Waterman, John  │do.   │  22│June 7, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Weber, John     │do.   │  34│July 4, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │
 Williams, Henry │do.   │  18│July 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Williams, John  │do.   │  22│July 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Wilson, Alfred  │do.   │  24│Aug. 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Promoted to Sergt.
                 │      │    │              │        │  Major March 1,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Writee, John    │do.   │  22│Sept. 1, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Young, David    │do.   │  43│June 11, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out with
                 │      │    │              │        │  company July 9,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1865.
 Young, George   │do.   │  18│Sept. 10, 1863│ 3 yrs. │
 Zeigler, Adam   │do.   │  18│July 10, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered out May
                 │      │    │              │        │  30, 1865, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Camp Dennison,
                 │      │    │              │        │  O., by order of
                 │      │    │              │        │  War Department.
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────


                          UNASSIGNED RECRUITS.

 ════════════════╤══════╤════╤══════════════╤════════╤══════════════════
      Names.     │Rank. │Age.│   Date of    │ Period │     Remarks.
                 │      │    │ Entering the │   of   │
                 │      │    │   Service.   │Service.│
 ────────────────┼──────┼────┼──────────────┼────────┼──────────────────
 Armstrong, Henry│Priv. │  24│Feb. 23, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 26, 1864.
 Armstrong, Henry│do.   │  39│Nov. 24, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 11, 1863.
 Bell, William   │do.   │  29│Oct. 27, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 3, 1863.
 Bradley, Bernard│do.   │  25│Oct. 20, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 22, 1864.
 Brinnen, Henry  │do.   │  19│Nov. 20, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
   C.            │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 27, 1863.
 Byer, George    │do.   │  22│Sept. 22, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 19, 1863.
 Cuttings,       │do.   │  20│May 28, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │No record
   Purtran W.    │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 3, 1863.
 Duval, William  │do.   │  21│April 25, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 30, 1863.
 Eletson, Charles│do.   │  21│Dec. 15, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 6, 1864.
 Forall, Michael │do.   │  21│April 25, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 30, 1863.
 Forest, John    │do.   │  39│Sept. 28, 1863│ 3 yrs. │Died Oct. 28,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1863, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.
 Forrest, William│do.   │  21│April 29, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  May 11, 1863.
 Foster, Hiram   │do.   │  39│Jan. 27, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Feb. 11, 1864.
 Gates, Charles  │Priv. │  21│Feb. 22, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
   A.            │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 5, 1864.
 Gere, Elmore    │do.   │  23│Dec. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 29,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, in field
                 │      │    │              │        │  hospital near
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tennessee.
 Hart, Larius    │do.   │  36│Dec. 19, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Mustered as Darius
                 │      │    │              │        │  Hart. No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 11, 1864.
 Hucke, George V.│do.   │  35│Dec. 17, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 28, 1863.
 Kiney, Robert   │do.   │  20│Feb. 23, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  March 15, 1864.
 Lapin, Arthur   │do.   │  33│Nov. 21, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │Died Jan. 14,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 McCabe, Michael │do.   │  25│Sept. 5, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 McForley, John  │do.   │  20│Jan. 22, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 25, 1864.
 Murphy, Michael │do.   │  30│Oct. 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Oct. 21, 1863.
 Neff, John      │do.   │  26│Mch. 30, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Died June 17,
                 │      │    │              │        │  1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Louisville, Ky.
 Pollard, John J.│do.   │  18│Feb. 20, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │Died May 24, 1864,
                 │      │    │              │        │  at Chattanooga,
                 │      │    │              │        │  Tenn.
 Rennick, Thomas │do.   │  38│Nov. 30, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Dec. 16, 1863.
 Riel, August    │do.   │  18│April 21, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 30, 1863.
 Rose, Patrick   │do.   │  35│Dec. 10, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │
 Ross, John M.   │do.   │  26│April 25, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 30, 1863.
 Sartis, Joseph  │do.   │  32│Dec. 22, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 6, 1864.
 Shea, John      │do.   │  25│Jan. 22, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 25, 1864.
 Smith, Henry I. │do.   │  26│May 30, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  June 25, 1863.
 Tacy, Peter     │do.   │  29│Dec. 16, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 6, 1864.
 Tilley, William │do.   │  43│April 21, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 30, 1863.
 Wagner, Frank   │do.   │  22│Dec. 2, 1863  │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Jan. 6, 1864.
 Walter, George  │do.   │  18│Nov. 18, 1863 │ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  Nov. 21, 1863.
 Wilson, Thomas  │do.   │  18│Jan. 4, 1864  │ 3 yrs. │Discharged Feb.
                 │      │    │              │        │  27, 1864, at
                 │      │    │              │        │  Columbus, O., on
                 │      │    │              │        │  Surgeon's
                 │      │    │              │        │  certificate of
                 │      │    │              │        │  disability.
 Wood, Charles   │do.   │  21│April 24, 1863│ 3 yrs. │No record
                 │      │    │              │        │  subsequent to
                 │      │    │              │        │  April 30, 1863.
 Wright, George  │do.   │  23│Feb. 19, 1864 │ 3 yrs. │
 ────────────────┴──────┴────┴──────────────┴────────┴──────────────────




                             ROLL OF HONOR
                                 OF THE
                124th Regiment, Ohio Volunteer Infantry.


      _Compiled from Publications of the U. S. War Department and
                        Other Official Sources._

 ═════════════╤═══╤══════╤═════════╤══════════════╤═════════════════════
    Names.    │Co.│Rank. │  Died.  │   Buried.    │      Remarks.
 ─────────────┼───┼──────┼─────────┼──────────────┼─────────────────────
 Abby, Reuben │ C │Corp. │Feb.  16,│Nashville,    │
   L.         │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 Allinger,    │ G │Priv. │Dec.   3,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   John       │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Nov. 25,
              │   │      │         │              │  1863, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. D, grave 144.
 Anderson,    │ C │Priv. │Aug.   3,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   John       │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  F, grave 279.
 Atkins,      │ B │Corp. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   William    │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Aumend,      │ D │Capt. │May   —, │              │Died at Plymouth,
   George W.  │   │      │  1864   │              │  Ashtabula County,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ohio.
 Baird,       │ G │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Alexander  │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Ball, William│ G │Priv. │Aug.  13,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  E, grave 404.
 Barnes, Trace│ C │Mus.  │Oct.  27,│Richmond, Va. │Died in Rebel Prison.
   L.         │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Bartlett,    │ A │Corp. │Aug.   5,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
   Edward G.  │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 Bartlett,    │ A │Priv. │Mch.  10,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   John H.    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Baumgardner, │ D │Priv. │July   6,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Frank      │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  D, grave 86.
 Beechan,     │ F │Priv. │July   5,│              │Died of wounds
   Joseph A.  │   │      │  1864   │              │  received in action.
 Bennett,     │ F │Priv. │Mch.   6,│Richmond, Va. │Died in Rebel Prison.
   Robert     │   │      │  1864   │              │
 Benton,      │ B │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   George     │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Buckhart,    │ F │Priv. │Nov.  10,│              │
   Samuel     │   │      │  1862   │              │
 Bushon,      │ C │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   Orange C.  │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Cain, Edwin  │ E │Priv. │Jan.   5,│Louisville,   │Interred in Cave Hill
   C.         │   │      │  1863   │  Ky.         │  Cemetery.
 Caldwell,    │ H │Corp. │Sept. 18,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   William    │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │
 Cannell,     │ I │Sergt.│Oct.   4,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
   James      │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action
              │   │      │         │              │  at Rocky Face
              │   │      │         │              │  Ridge, Georgia.
 Carran,      │ E │Sergt.│June  23,│              │
   William    │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Casey, John  │ C │Priv. │Nov.  25,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn.
 Chandler,    │ E │Priv. │Aug.  14,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   Matthew T. │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  5548.
 Chapman,     │ B │Priv. │April 16,│Nashville,    │
   Lucius H.  │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Chappel,     │ E │Priv. │June  23,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   James, Jr. │   │      │  1864   │              │  Kenesaw Mountain,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Cheney,      │ G │Priv. │Nov.   3,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Leander    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  A, grave 331.
 Clark, James │ K │Priv. │May    9,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Rocky Face Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Clark, Jewett│ E │Priv. │July  26,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Tullahoma,
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. K, grave 51,
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Clark, John  │ K │Priv. │Mch.  21,│Richmond, Va. │Died in Rebel Prison.
              │   │      │  1864   │              │
 Clark,       │ E │Priv. │Nov.  18,│Cleveland, O. │
   Legrand P. │   │      │  1864   │              │
 Clark, Samuel│ H │Priv. │Sept. 26,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
              │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  9772.
 Cole, Lucius │ E │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   E.         │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Coramy,      │ F │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Joseph     │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Cornwall,    │ A │Priv. │May   15,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   Willis     │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Resaca, Ga.
 Crapser, John│ F │Sergt.│Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   W.         │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Crocker,     │ E │Priv. │Mch.  30,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Myron      │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  E, grave 654.
 Crow, John   │ B │Priv. │Jan.  13,│              │Died at Homer, Medina
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  County, O.
 Cutler,      │ G │Corp. │Aug.  17.│Murfreesboro, │Interred in section
   William    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  J, grave 287, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Damon, James │ B │Priv. │Mch.  26,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Dangerfield, │ H │Priv. │Jan.   4,│Cleveland, O. │
   Edward     │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Daub, Peter  │ D │Priv. │Oct.  10,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Sept. 19,
              │   │      │         │              │  1863, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Daugherty,   │ B │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Lyman F.   │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Dauson,      │ D │Sergt.│Mch.  10,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   William    │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Dempsey,     │ E │1st   │Dec.  16,│Nashville,    │Killed in battle.
   Terrence A.│   │Lt.   │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Interred in sec. G,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 403.
 Devan,       │ H │Priv. │Mch.   9,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   Charles A. │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Doyle, John  │ H │Sergt.│Oct.  10,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Sept. 19,
              │   │      │         │              │  1863, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  A, grave 296.
 Ducey,       │ C │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   Michael    │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Edwards,     │ I │Priv. │Aug.  30,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   William    │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │
 Eukers,      │ E │Priv. │Dec.   9,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   Samuel     │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │
 Everett,     │ B │Priv. │June   8,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   Ambrose M. │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 Fallen, Owen │ G │Priv. │Mch.  12,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 52, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Ferguson,    │ C │Priv. │May   31,│New Albany.   │Died at
   Samuel     │   │      │  1864   │  Ind.        │  Jeffersonville,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ind. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. B, grave 547.
 Finney,      │ A │Priv. │Feb.   1,│              │Died at Clinton Cross
   William O. │   │      │  1864   │              │  Roads, Tennessee.
 Flickinger,  │ B │Priv. │Nov.  25,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   Morris     │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn.
 Forest, John │[A]│Priv. │Oct.  28,│Louisville,   │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1863   │  Ky.         │  B, row 16, grave
              │   │      │         │              │  19, Cave Hill
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Forsyth,     │ C │Priv. │Nov.  25,│Cleveland, O. │
   James W.   │   │      │  1862   │              │
 French,      │ B │Priv. │April 14,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   Lorenzo G. │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Fritz, Dexter│ B │Priv. │June   5,│Marietta, Ga. │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  received in battle
              │   │      │         │              │  of Dallas, Ga.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in sec. G,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 803.
 Fritz, Jacob │ A │Priv. │July  18,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action
              │   │      │         │              │  near Resaca, Ga.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in sec. F,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 31.
 Fritz, John  │ C │Priv. │Nov.  28,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  D, grave 174.
 Frost, James │ I │Capt. │Nov.  26,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   H.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Nov. 25,
              │   │      │         │              │  1863, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn.
 Garzee, Eben │ A │Corp. │Nov.  12,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   W.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 Gauntley,    │ K │Priv. │Nov.   6,│New Albany,   │
   Hugh       │   │      │  1864   │  Ind.        │
 Gere, Elmore │[5]│Priv. │Jan.  29,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  H, grave 310.
 Gifford,     │ A │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   Thomas S.  │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Goble, Darwin│ H │Priv. │Mch.   5,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   S.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 48, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Gore, George │ D │Priv. │July   9,│Nashville,    │
   W.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Gould, John  │ A │Priv. │Sept. 12,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   W.         │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  9566.
 Gregory,     │ H │Priv. │May   14,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   Charles A. │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Resaca, Ga.
 Grobe,       │ F │Priv. │Dec.   9,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Christian  │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  D, grave 341.
 Haines, David│ B │Priv. │April  5,│Nashville,    │
   B.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Halterman,   │ C │Priv. │Dec.  26,│Cleveland, O. │
   Matthias   │   │      │  1862   │              │
 Hampson,     │.. │Major │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   James B.   │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  section A, grave A
              │   │      │         │              │  A.
 Harrison,    │ D │Priv. │April 14,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   John Q.    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 10, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Harrison,    │ H │Corp. │July  24,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Manchester,
   Samuel H.  │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. K, grave 171,
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Hart, Jehu   │ F │Priv. │Nov.   2,│Richmond, Va. │Died in Rebel Prison.
              │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Haskins,     │ A │Priv. │Jan.  14,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Lyman G.   │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  E, grave 42.
 Henry,       │ A │1st   │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Harrison F.│   │Ser.  │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Herr,        │ A │Priv. │Aug.  12,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Benjamin   │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  J, grave 525.
 Hicks, Egbert│ C │Priv. │Nov.  22,│Nashville,    │
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 Hodgeman,    │ A │Priv. │Mch.  17,│Nashville,    │
   David P.   │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Homan, Edward│ D │Priv. │April 23,│Knoxville,    │Died at Bull's Gap,
              │   │      │  1865   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn.
 Hoover, John │ D │Priv. │Mch.  10,│Nashville,    │
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 Hopwood, John│ C │Priv. │Aug.   7,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 Hudson, James│ D │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Hufton,      │ F │Priv. │Aug.  10,│Murfreesboro, │Interred in section
   William    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  K, grave 172, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Hurley, John │ H │Priv. │Sept.  1,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   C.         │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  9622.
 Hutchinson,  │ D │Corp. │April  8,│Knoxville,    │Interred in section
   James O.   │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  6, grave 135.
 Irwin, John  │ C │Capt. │June  24,│              │Died of wounds
   B.         │   │      │  1864   │              │  received in action.
 Johnson,     │ I │Priv. │Aug.  30,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   Enoch      │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  7308.
 Johnson,     │ I │Priv. │June  28,│Nashville,    │
   Solomon    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Johnson,     │ C │Priv. │Feb.  28,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Thomas     │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  A, grave 135.
 Kamp, Samuel │ H │Priv. │Oct.  10,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Sept. 19,
              │   │      │         │              │  1868, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Kenfield,    │ A │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Henry      │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Knerim,      │ E │Priv. │Aug.  18,│Chattanooga,  │Died of accidental
   Oswelt     │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  wounds.
 Konzen,      │ G │Priv. │April 23,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   George     │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  E, grave 1153.
 Kurtz, Daniel│ K │Sergt.│Feb.  20,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   M.         │   │      │  1865   │  Tenn.       │  H, grave 330.
 Lalumiere,   │ G │Priv. │Aug.  28,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Manchester,
   Alphonse   │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Lambert,     │ H │Corp. │Aug.  14,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Manchester,
   Lawson     │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Lang, Henry  │ F │Corp. │May   14,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   B.         │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  K, grave 231.
 Lapin, Arthur│[5]│Priv. │Jan.  14,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  D, grave 48.
 Lent, Nelson │ H │Sergt.│Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Litchfield,  │ A │Priv. │Nov.  25,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   John       │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn.
 Lowe,        │ B │Priv. │July  13,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Alexander  │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  E, grave 803.
   B.         │   │      │         │              │
 Lowry, Henry │ H │Sergt.│Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   E.         │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Luce,        │ D │Priv. │Mch.  17,│Annapolis, Md.│
   Christopher│   │      │  1865   │              │
 Lynch, John  │ C │Corp. │June  26,│Marietta, Ga. │Died in Rebel Prison
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  at Atlanta, Ga.
 Lyndon, John │ G │Priv. │June  10,│Louisville,   │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1863   │  Ky.         │  B, row 3, grave 62,
              │   │      │         │              │  Cave Hill Cemetery.
 McBane,      │ C │Priv. │May   10,│Nashville,    │
   Charles A. │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 McCormick,   │ D │Priv. │May    8,│Louisville,   │Interred in Cave Hill
   John J.    │   │      │  1865   │  Ky.         │  Cemetery.
 McCort, James│ C │Priv. │June  29,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 McCune, John │ I │Corp. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 McDermit,    │ H │Priv. │Jan.   1,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   John       │   │      │  1865   │  Tenn.       │  G, grave 667.
 McIntosh,    │ C │Priv. │Nov.  20,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   James      │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  A, grave 115.
 Martin, John │ B │Priv. │June   3,│Marietta, Ga. │Died at Dallas, Ga.,
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  of wounds received
              │   │      │         │              │  in action.
 Martin,      │ K │Priv. │Mch.  21,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Joseph     │   │      │  1865   │  Tenn.       │  J, grave 1095.
 Martin,      │ K │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   William    │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Maskall,     │ A │Priv. │June  27,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
   Thomas     │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  H, grave 581.
 Matthews,    │ C │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Henry      │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Meheo, Edward│ A │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Miller, Silas│ E │Priv. │April  8,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   F.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Moon, Charles│ E │Priv. │July   7,│              │Died of wounds
   E.         │   │      │  1864   │              │  received in action.
 Morse,       │ D │Priv. │June   5,│New Albany,   │Interred in section
   Sylvester  │   │      │  1864   │  Ind.        │  B, grave 736.
 Murphy, John │ I │Corp. │Oct.  14,│Chattanooga,  │
   E.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Murphy,      │ C │Priv. │April 14,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   Patrick    │   │      │  1865   │  Ga.         │
 Neff, John   │[5]│Priv. │June  17,│Louisville,   │Interred in Cave Hill
              │   │      │  1864   │  Ky.         │  Cemetery.
 Nelson,      │ G │Priv. │Oct.   6,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   Francis    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Sept. 19,
              │   │      │         │              │  1863, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Nicholson,   │ H │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   William    │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Noel, Philip │ H │Priv. │May   14,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Resaca, Ga.
 Obernour,    │ G │Priv. │April 16,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   Frederick  │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 19, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 O'Brien,     │ A │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   Andrew     │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 O'Neil,      │ K │Priv. │June  24,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   Edward     │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  E, grave 104.
 Palmer,      │ B │Priv. │Mch.   8,│Nashville,    │
   William L. │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Parker,      │ H │Corp. │Aug.  11,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   William M. │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  5377.
 Parker, Zenas│ E │Priv. │Sept. 14,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   D.         │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  8753.
 Parsons,     │ A │Corp. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   George F.  │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Payne, Samuel│ C │1st   │Dec.  16,│Nashville,    │Killed in battle.
   B.         │   │Lt.   │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 Penny,       │ D │Priv. │Jan.  23,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
   Christopher│   │      │  1865   │  Tenn.       │  received Dec. 16,
              │   │      │         │              │  1864, in battle.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  H, grave 366.
 Peters, Lewis│ B │Corp. │May   31,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed while on
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  picket duty.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in sec. A,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 854.
 Phillips,    │ I │1st   │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Jackson V. │   │Ser.  │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Pierson,     │ B │Priv. │Mch.  23,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   Isaac      │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 5, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Plunkett,    │ E │Corp. │Aug.  29,│Andersonville,│Interred in grave
   Matthew J. │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  7157.
 Pollard, John│[5]│Priv. │May   24,│Chattanooga,  │
   J.         │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 Powers,      │ B │Priv. │July  26,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Timothy    │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  F, grave 94.
 Quinn, Arthur│ C │Priv. │Feb.   5,│Fort Donelson,│Died at Dover, Tenn.
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn        │
 Ray, John    │ C │Priv. │Dec.  16,│Nashville,    │Killed in battle.
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │
 Rei, John    │ K │Priv. │June   9,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
              │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  1763.
 Remengobury, │ E │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   Carrollton │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Rohn, Henry  │ D │Priv. │Dec.  14,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  D, grave 489.
 Rowe, Amandus│ F │Priv. │June   6,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
              │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  2410.
 Russell,     │ A │Priv. │Mch.  17,│Nashville,    │
   Wilbur F.  │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Saunders,    │ K │Priv. │Dec.   9,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   George     │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  D, grave 343.
 Schaffer,    │ D │Priv. │May   14,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   Christian  │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Resaca, Ga.
 Schock,      │ I │Priv. │Nov.   3,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Samuel     │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  A, grave 428.
 Segmire,     │ A │Priv. │July  31,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Manchester,
   Jacob      │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Sellers,     │ H │Priv. │June   2,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   David      │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received May 9,
              │   │      │         │              │  1864, in action.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  D, grave 455.
 Sevoy,       │ B │Sergt.│July 16, │Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Japheth S. │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  F, grave 144.
 Shaw, Samuel │ I │Priv. │July  30,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
              │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  4354.
 Sherman,     │ F │Priv. │Jan.  10,│              │
   Daniel     │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Shewark,     │ H │Priv. │Nov.   1,│Richmond, Va. │Died in Rebel Prison.
   Joseph E.  │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Shirkley,    │ G │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Matthew    │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Sims, Joseph │ K │Priv. │Nov.   5,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  A, grave 111.
 Sipe, Adam   │ A │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Smith,       │ E │Priv. │Mch.  25,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   Alvarado   │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 32, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Snyder,      │ D │Priv. │Oct.  15,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in sec. B,
   William    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  grave 168.
 Sooy, Andrew │ B │Priv. │Nov.  19,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   J.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  A, grave 69.
 Sperry,      │ F │Priv. │April 14,│              │
   Sherman    │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Springer,    │ E │Corp. │Dec.  19,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
   Chester D. │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received in battle.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  F, grave 244.
 Staples,     │ H │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Ephraim G. │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Stedman,     │ D │1st   │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   Charles M. │   │Lt.   │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Stewart,     │ K │Priv. │May   14,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   Alexander  │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Resaca, Ga.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in sec. K,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 410.
 Stone, George│ F │Priv. │Feb.   1,│Knoxville,    │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  5, grave 135.
 Stout, Isaac │ D │Sergt.│May    9,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   L.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Swartwood,   │ E │Priv. │Feb.  14,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   DeWitt     │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  Franklin section,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 14, Stone
              │   │      │         │              │  River Cemetery.
 Sweeny,      │ A │Priv. │Oct.  25,│Andersonville,│Died in Rebel Prison.
   Edward     │   │      │  1864   │  Ga.         │  Interred in grave
              │   │      │         │              │  11,433.
 Terry, John  │ G │Priv. │Nov.  22,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in action at
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. C, grave 88.
 Teveling,    │ I │Priv. │Aug.   5,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Tullahoma,
   William    │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. J, grave 205,
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Thoma, John  │ F │Priv. │May   10,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in action near
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  Rocky Face Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  section L, grave
              │   │      │         │              │  280.
 Thompson,    │ A │Priv. │Nov.  18,│Chattanooga,  │
   Hiram      │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Thompson,    │ K │Priv. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
   Thomas     │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Thompson,    │ K │Priv. │Feb.   2,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
   William B. │   │      │  1865   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 Tilly,       │ B │Priv. │Dec.   3,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   William T. │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  D, grave 743.
 Tousley,     │ E │Priv. │Sept. 25,│Chattanooga,  │Interred in section
   Charles W. │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  B, grave 77.
 Trow, Elijah │ A │Priv. │Mch.   9,│Nashville,    │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  E, grave 4.
 Vandermark,  │ B │Priv. │Nov.  25,│Chattanooga,  │Killed in battle of
   Alex'd'r   │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Mission Ridge,
              │   │      │         │              │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  sec. B, grave 255.
 Vosler, Jacob│ A │Priv. │Mch.   4,│Knoxville,    │Interred in section
              │   │      │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  5, grave 155.
 Wade, Ira    │ E │Corp. │Sept. 19,│              │Killed in battle of
              │   │      │  1863   │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
 Waldo,       │ C │1st   │July   5,│Nashville,    │Died of wounds
   William R. │   │Lt.   │  1864   │  Tenn.       │  received June 13,
              │   │      │         │              │  1864, in action.
 Walters, Adam│ B │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
              │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Weeks, Lewis │ I │Priv. │April  2,│Nashville,    │
   R.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 Werline, John│ D │Priv. │June   1,│Murfreesboro, │Died at Franklin,
   P.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  Tenn. Interred in
              │   │      │         │              │  section K, 256,
              │   │      │         │              │  Stone River
              │   │      │         │              │  Cemetery.
 Wheeler,     │ F │Priv. │Nov.   1,│Richmond, Va. │Died in Rebel Prison
   Lucius     │   │      │  1863   │              │  at Belle Isle, Va.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in section
              │   │      │         │              │  1, row C, grave
              │   │      │         │              │  193.
 Williams,    │ A │Priv. │May   27,│Marietta, Ga. │Killed in action at
   James      │   │      │  1864   │              │  Pickett's Mills,
              │   │      │         │              │  Ga.
 Wing, George │ A │Sergt.│Oct.   1,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
   D.         │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received in action.
 Wing, Stephen│ A │Priv. │Jan.   6,│              │Died at Middleburg,
   P.         │   │      │  1865   │              │  Cuyahoga County, O.
 Wyeth,       │ A │Priv. │Dec.   2,│Annapolis, Md.│
   Jonathan   │   │      │  1863   │              │
 Wylie, Thomas│ C │Priv. │Dec.  10,│Chattanooga,  │Died of wounds
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │  received Sept. 19,
              │   │      │         │              │  1863, in battle of
              │   │      │         │              │  Chickamauga, Ga.
              │   │      │         │              │  Interred in sec. D,
              │   │      │         │              │  grave 736.
 Yost, David  │ A │Priv. │April 11,│Nashville,    │
              │   │      │  1863   │  Tenn.       │
 ─────────────┴───┴──────┴─────────┴──────────────┴─────────────────────

Footnote 5:

  Unassigned.




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Discharge date for John R. Tudor on p. 232 is previous to his
    enlistment date.
 2. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CAMPAIGNS OF THE 124TH REGIMENT, OHIO VOLUNTEER INFANTRY, WITH ROSTER AND ROLL OF HONOR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


