The Project Gutenberg eBook of When mother lets us make paper box furniture
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: When mother lets us make paper box furniture
        A book which shows children just how to make most attractive toy furniture out of materials which cost practically nothing--toys which give as much pleasure as those from expensive toy shops

Author: G. Ellingwood Rich

Release date: May 20, 2024 [eBook #73658]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Moffat, Yard and Company, 1914

Credits: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN MOTHER LETS US MAKE PAPER BOX FURNITURE ***






WHEN MOTHER LETS US MAKE PAPER BOX FURNITURE

[Illustration: A Happy Little Worker.]




                           WHEN MOTHER LETS US
                              MAKE PAPER BOX
                                FURNITURE

                 A BOOK WHICH SHOWS CHILDREN JUST HOW TO
                MAKE MOST ATTRACTIVE TOY FURNITURE OUT OF
              MATERIALS WHICH COST PRACTICALLY NOTHING—TOYS
                      WHICH GIVE AS MUCH PLEASURE AS
                     THOSE FROM EXPENSIVE TOY SHOPS.

                         _By_ G. ELLINGWOOD RICH
          _Teacher of Art and Manual Training, Brooklyn Training
                           School for Teachers_

                        ILLUSTRATED BY THE AUTHOR

                              [Illustration]

                                 NEW YORK
                         MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
                                   1914

                           Copyright, 1914, by
                          MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY
                                 New York

                           All Rights Reserved




                                    TO

                           MY FATHER AND MOTHER

                     THE BEST PLAYFELLOWS I EVER HAD
                    TO WHOSE ORIGINALITY AND INGENUITY
                   I OWE MY FIRST CONSTRUCTIVE IMPULSES




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                         PAGE

              PARLOR FURNITURE

    DIVAN                                  34

    BOOK SHELVES                           52

    WRITING DESK                           56

    MORRIS CHAIR                           60

    LIBRARY TABLE                          64

    FIREPLACE                              74

    PIANO                                  78

    PARLOR CHAIR                           88

    TABOURET AND PALM                      96

    SCREEN                                 98

    PIANO BENCH                           108

             BEDROOM FURNITURE

    BED                                    30

    DRESSER                                46

    CRIB                                   80

    CHIFFONIER                             82

    CHAIR                                  88

    SCREEN                                 98

    CRADLE                                102

           DINING ROOM FURNITURE

    TABLE                                  38

    ARM CHAIR                              42

    FIREPLACE                              74

    CHAIR                                  88

    HIGH CHAIR                             92

    TABOURET AND PALM                      96

             KITCHEN FURNITURE

    TABLE                                  38

    STOVE                                  68

    KITCHEN CABINET                        84

    CHAIR                                  88

    WASH TUB AND BENCH                    100

               HALL FURNITURE

    HALL RACK                              90

    UMBRELLA STAND                        106

    CLOCK                                 110




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                         PAGE

    A HAPPY LITTLE WORKER       _Frontispiece_

    NECESSARY TOOLS                        17

    BED                                    29

    DETAILS OF BED                         31

    DIVAN                                  33

    DETAILS OF DIVAN                       35

    DINING TABLE                           37

    DETAILS OF DINING TABLE                39

    ARM CHAIR                              41

    DETAILS OF ARM CHAIR                   43

    DRESSER                                45

    DETAILS OF DRESSER                     47

    BIG BROTHER                            49

    BOOK CASE                              51

    DETAILS OF BOOK CASE                   53

    WRITING DESK                           55

    DETAILS OF WRITING DESK                57

    MORRIS CHAIR                           59

    DETAILS OF MORRIS CHAIR                61

    LIBRARY TABLE                          63

    DETAILS OF LIBRARY TABLE               65

    STOVE                                  67

    DETAILS OF STOVE                       69

    FUN ON A RAINY DAY                     71

    FIREPLACE                              73

    DETAILS OF FIREPLACE                   75

    PIANO                                  77

    DETAILS OF PIANO                       79

    CRIB                                   81

    CHIFFONIER                             83

    KITCHEN CABINET                        85

    GETTING SUPPER                         87

    PARLOR CHAIR                           89

    HALL RACK                              91

    HIGH CHAIR                             93

    WHEN BABY IS HUNGRY                    95

    TABOURET AND PALM                      97

    SCREEN                                 99

    WASH TUB AND BENCH                    101

    CRADLE                                103

    ROCK-A-BY-BABY                        105

    UMBRELLA STAND                        107

    PIANO BENCH                           109

    CLOCK                                 111


TO GROWN-UPS.

You are interested in very little, middle-sized or big girls or boys,
each child according to his years craving a medium for self expression
and opportunity to create.

To each according to his interests and developing powers the suggestions
in this little book are offered.

It is the author’s hope that the industry, perseverance and ingenuity
needed to work out the suggestions may help in some small way to lay the
foundation upon which big after things may be builded.


TO VERY LITTLE GIRLS AND BOYS.

You can make the furniture easily if your big sister or brother will read
the directions to you. You will have great fun looking at the pictures,
listening to the rhymes and playing with the furniture.


TO MIDDLE-SIZED GIRLS.

You, also, will enjoy the pictures and rhymes. Of course you will take
great pleasure playing with your doll furniture, but, best of all, you
can make every bit of it _yourself_. Just think—you can make it just the
size and just the color you wish it; and the rhymes will suggest many
delightful little “extras” to make your doll home attractive just as
mother makes hers.


TO BIG GIRLS AND MIDDLE-SIZED AND BIG BOYS.

Even though you may not wish to play with the furniture yourself you
will thoroughly enjoy making and giving it to some dear little folks of
your acquaintance. You will also be getting and giving a great deal of
pleasure by helping other little friends make their own furniture.

You will enjoy changing the designs or making other pieces of furniture
from your own original ideas. I suggest that you design and make a china
closet, sideboard, combination desk and bookcase, four posted bed, wash
stand with towel rack, music cabinet, business desk for “father,” rocking
chair, circular top table, lamp or shirt-waist box. I’m sure you will
think of many more.


TO MAKE OTHERS HAPPY.

You might make toy furniture for the children’s ward in a hospital.

You might make them for some little friend who is quarantined.

You might make them for some little “shut-in.”

You might teach some little “shut-in” how to make them, being sure to
keep him supplied with boxes.

You might organize a toy-making club and make them as gifts for poor
children.

Your Sunday school class might make them to be sold on a “Toy Table” at
your church fair.

You might show them to your teacher at school. She might wish to form a
club so that many children may have the pleasure of making them.

You might make them for Christmas or birthday presents for your little
friends.

[Illustration: NECESSARY TOOLS.]


MATERIALS AND HOW TO USE THEM.


BOXES.

Boxes of all sorts, sizes and kinds are to be had by simply asking for
them. Every store throws away dozens of them every day. They seldom keep
any because they haven’t room for them. If you explain to a clerk in a
store what you are doing with the boxes, I am sure that he will save
them for you. You must be sure to go for them at the time he tells you
because they will be in his way. You will find many fine, strong boxes at
drygoods, stationery, drug and candy stores.

[Illustration]


SIZE AND PROPORTIONS.

You must first decide about what size you wish your set of furniture to
be and then make a collection of boxes of suitable sizes.

If you wish to make a tiny set to fit into a little play house to be used
for small china dolls or paper dolls, then collect small peppermint,
spool, jewelry, powder or pill boxes.

If you wish to make larger furniture to be used in a large play house or
on the floor, for medium-sized dolls, make a collection of large candy,
stocking, collar and corset boxes.

If you wish to make quite large furniture to be used on the floor,
for good-sized dolls, collect still larger corset, envelope, shoe and
wholesale candy boxes.

Try as far as possible to keep all the pieces of furniture planned for
one room in good proportion to one another.

Try also to keep all the parts of each object in good proportion.

[Illustration]


“SCORING.”

To bend a stiff piece of cardboard so that the edge will be nice and
straight, it should be “scored.” Lay a ruler along the line where it
is to be bent and make a light scratch with the knife. This is called
“scoring.” The cardboard should then be bent with the “scoring” on the
_outside_.

[Illustration]


CUTTING.

To cut a box or cover into two pieces, draw around the sides and bottom,
making it “square” by using a carpenter’s square, a draughtsman’s
triangle or the corner of another box or cover. Use scissors to cut down
the edges of the box; if the scissors will not cut quite to the bottom,
finish with the knife. “Score” across the bottom and bend it. By bending
back and forth, the two pieces will come apart.

To cut a piece _out_, as when shaping a leg like those of the dresser,
use scissors to make two cuts in from the edge; use the knife to “score”
across between the cuts, and bend back and forth until the piece comes
out.

To cut a piece _out_ to make slats like those in the headboard of the
bed, use a ruler to draw the shape of the “hole”; stick the point of
the knife through the cardboard at the corner of the “hole,” and, with
a _sawing motion_, carefully follow the lines. To prevent the cardboard
from tearing, put your hand underneath to support it, but be _very
careful_ to keep your fingers away from the knife.

[Illustration]


FASTENING.

To fasten the parts of the furniture together use brass fasteners instead
of glue. Fasteners cost about ten cents for a box containing one hundred.
Glue is not satisfactory because it will not securely hold the heavy
cardboard. These toys are to be _played with_ by children and must be
strong and securely fastened together.

Hold two parts together and stick the point of the knife through both
pieces. Push the prongs of the fasteners through the slit and separate
them on the under side; then flatten them in opposite directions.

The fasteners can be put in and bent to fasten and, at the same time,
suggest knobs, hooks and piano pedals. The directions and pictures will
show how.

It is possible to fasten parts together by punching _two_ holes instead
of one and using string. The string can be pulled through with a darning
needle and must then be tightly knotted and cut off. This is strong
enough but slower and more difficult.

[Illustration]


PAINTING.

The little pieces of furniture are very cunning whether they are painted
or not, but painting them adds greatly to their attractiveness.

When you have finished one piece you may be so anxious to see how it will
look when painted that you will be tempted to paint it immediately. It
will be wiser and more workmanlike to plan and make _all_ the furniture
for one room before you paint any of it.

Before you begin to paint, it is a good idea to examine the corners of
the furniture; if any of them are split or weak, strengthen them with
adhesive tape of some sort (passe-partout tape comes in convenient and
inexpensive rolls). The paint will cover up the tape.

Since boxes usually have printed labels which may show on the furniture,
it is best to use a _thick_ paint. Enamel in small ten cent cans may be
bought in a variety of colors suitable for the furniture, black, white,
mahogany, antique oak, light oak and rosewood. If dull paints or stains
are used, put on a coat of shellac to make it shine like varnish. White
shellac can be bought in bottles for about twenty cents a pint.

One brush will do for all colors because with care it can be kept clean
and soft. Clean shellac brushes with alcohol; clean paint brushes with
turpentine. The turpentine will take paint off of fingers or remove any
little spatters which may accidentally have gone on to other things.


THESE ARE SOME PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS:

Choose a place to work—kitchen table, bench in woodshed, sewing table in
nursery, workshop, barn, back porch, under a tree in the orchard or back
yard.

Spread papers or oil cloth to protect mother’s furniture and carpets from
paint.

Choose a place to put your furniture while it is drying, where no one is
liable to put other things which might be damaged by the paint.

Use a screw driver to pry off the cover of the paint can; scissors or
knife will break if used for this purpose.

Use a small stick like a meat skewer or old pen-holder to stir your paint
from the bottom. It will need to be stirred thoroughly each time it is
used.

Paint all the underneath and lower parts first, while you are still able
to hold it in your hands; then set it down and hold an upper corner while
you paint all the rest; then let go and paint that corner.

Put the cover on the can when you have finished. If the paint has
thickened on the edge of the can it should be scraped off, because the
paint will dry up if the cover is not tightly closed.

_Thoroughly_ clean your brush.

Put your painting materials in some place where mother lets you keep such
things.

Pick up and destroy all the soiled papers.

[Illustration]


TO BOYS.

    Don’t think this work’s for _girls_ alone,
      For surely that’s not true;
    It’s every whit as boyish sport
      As anything you do.

    And won’t the girls be pleased indeed,
      When to them you present
    As fine a set of furniture,
      As if to a store they’d sent?

    And you can good designers be,
      Makers and painters, too,
    The happiest little workmen known,
      In your occupations new.

    And you can play you’re salesmen keen,
      When all your goods are done,
    Or give them to your little friends,
      For surely that is fun.

    So now get boxes from the stores,
      And fasteners, bright and strong;
    Ruler and knife and scissors, too,
      Will help your work along.


TO GIRLS.

    Don’t think this work’s for _boys_ alone,
      For that’s not really true;
    It surely is as girlish fun
      As anything you do.

    Of course, when boys have made the toys,
      They’ll give them right away;
    But girls, when they have finished theirs,
      Will sit right down and play.

    You also may designers be,
      Makers and painters as well,
    And in your dainty workmanship
      May even the boys excel.

    But there’s one thing that girls can do,
      Which boys won’t undertake,
    That is, the attractive little things
      With needle and thread to make.

    So get your boxes and fasteners strong,
      And sewing materials you’ll need,
    And then your playhouse, when ’tis done,
      Will be unique indeed.


MAKING THE BED.

    A mattress you need and some pillows,
      Some cases, a blanket and sheet,
    To place in the little white bed you have made,
      I’m sure it will then be complete.

[Illustration: Bed.]




BED.


Use a shallow box and its cover.

For a large bed use a stocking box.

For a smaller bed use a spool or caramel box.

For a very small bed use a jewelry box.

1. Cut the _cover_ into two parts, making one part longer than the other.
The longer part is the headboard, the shorter part is the footboard.

2. Fit the headboard and footboard on the ends of the box and hold them
with both hands. Slide the box up or down until it looks like a bed.

3. Lay the footboard down, but hold the headboard and box together, until
you fasten them.

4. Fit the footboard on again to match the headboard, and fasten it.

5. Cut the bottom of headboard and footboard to look like legs. Also cut
the slats in the headboard and the footboard.

6. Paint brown or white.

[Illustration: Details of Bed.

    Large bed—stocking box
    Small bed—spool box
    Foot board
    Head board
    Cover—cut on dots
    Head board—Foot board
    Box
    Body of bed
    Fastened
    Legs and slats cut]


COSY DIVAN.

    To make this divan comfortable,
      What would you next suggest?
    You might make sofa pillows,
      So dolly may lie down and rest.

[Illustration: Divan.]




DIVAN.


Use a box with a cover which entirely overlaps it, or two boxes exactly
alike without their covers. They should be fairly deep, long and narrow,
like an ordinary candy box.

1. Cut away one long side, leaving the other long side for the back, and
the short ends for arms.

2. Set this on top of the cover and fasten through the seat.

3. Cut away pieces to shape the legs.

4. Cut slats in the back and arms.

5. Paint to match the rest of the furniture in the living-room. Use
antique oak, rosewood or mahogany.

[Illustration: Details of Divan.

    Candy box
    Box—front cut away
    Fastened to cover
    Legs and slats cut]


SETTING THE TABLE.

    If mother has an extra piece
      Of linen she won’t need,
    I’m sure she’d let you make a cloth,
      And be very pleased indeed.

    Perhaps you can make some napkins, too,
      Out of pieces, oh, so tiny;
    Then just set them with your dishes small,
      And knives and forks so shiny.

[Illustration: Dining Room Table.]




DINING TABLE.


Use a deep box and the cover of another larger box. The cover must be
about the same shape, but enough larger to project over the box like the
top of a table.

A correspondence card box may be used. Quite deep and strong boxes for
this purpose may be got from a drug store or dry goods store.

1. Place the box bottom up.

2. Place the cover on top and put fasteners through it into the box. A
piece of cardboard may be used, if you haven’t a cover of the right size.

3. Cut the legs as shown in the picture.

4. Paint to match the other furniture.

[Illustration: Details of Dining Table.

    Cover of slightly larger box
    “Correspondence card” box
    Fastened—bottom of box up
    Legs and rails cut]


THE FAMILY AT DINNER.

    Put this arm chair at the head of the table,
      And into it put father doll;
    Before him place the platter for meat,
      And play that he serves them all.

    At the opposite end, where the tea set stands,
      Of course mother doll should be,
    And on either side of the table,
      Their little children you’ll see.

[Illustration: Arm Chair.]




ARM CHAIR.


For a large chair, use two shoe boxes without their covers.

For a small chair, use a chocolate peppermint box and its cover.

For a medium sized chair, use a corset box without its cover.

The following directions are for the corset box:

1. From one end cut a piece as high as you wish the seat. From the other
end cut a piece at least twice as high, for the back.

2. Fit the seat into the back and fasten together.

3. Cut away the unnecessary “end” at the top.

4. Cut out the pieces to form the arms, the legs and back.

5. Paint to match the other furniture.

If you cut a corset box just in the middle, you can make _two_ chairs.
Use the two ends for the two seats, and the other two pieces for the two
backs.

[Illustration: Details of Arm Chair.

    Corset box—cut on dots
    Sides and back—Waste—Seat
    Sides and back—Seat—Fastened
    Top cut away—Arms cut—Slats cut]


A DAINTY LITTLE DRESSER.

    A little girl’s dresser should always be neat,
      As all little maidens know;
    And brushes and combs and scissors and files
      Must all be placed in a row.

    So when you arrange dolly’s dresser,
      Be careful of what you choose;
    And put on the top, only such things
      As you’re sure she’ll really use.

    Just make a muslin scarf of white
      Over yellow or pink or blue;
    Then make a pretty cushion small,
      Which things will nicely do.

    Add a powder puff and mirror,
      With comb and brush between;
    She surely can be taught, I know,
      To keep these neat and clean.

[Illustration: Dresser.]




DRESSER.


Use a box, with a cover which overlaps the box only a little.

For a large dresser use a shoe box.

For a medium sized dresser use a candy box, having the right kind of
cover, or a corset box of the wide and shallow kind.

For a very small dresser use a jewelry box.

1. Cut the _cover_ the height you wish the back to be.

2. Fit the box into the cover; hold with both hands, and slide the box up
or down until it looks like a dresser.

3. Mark where you wish the bottom of the box to be cut off. Cut it off
and fasten the two parts together.

4. Cut a hole for the “mirror” and fasten an extra piece of cardboard
behind it. Paste silver paper on the cardboard, or fasten a real piece of
looking glass between it and the back.

5. Cut pieces of cardboard for the “drawers,” and fasten them so that the
fasteners look like knobs.

6. Paint to match the other furniture. Mark key holes.

[Illustration: Details of Dresser.

    Low box—about twice as long as wide
    Back
    Fastened
    Cut on dots
    Legs and hole for “mirror.”
    Silver paper
    Drawer Fronts
    Extra back
    Back and drawers fastened.]


BIG BROTHER.

    Mother let me make these toys,
      And I made them all myself;
    And all I used was boxes
      I found upon a shelf.

    Now that the cute little things are made,
      I’ve painted them all as well;
    Dear little sister is surely pleased,
      As you from her face can tell.

[Illustration: Big Brother.]


DOLLY’S BOOKS.

    Cut small strips of paper,
      And fold them like a book;
    Upon the outer covers print,
      So they’ll quite natural look.

    If you would have some fairy tales,
      Or tales of gnomes and elves,
    Just make a goodly pile of these,
      And put them on the shelves.

    When dolly dear then learns to read
      Her tales of fairyland,
    She’ll find that all the books she loves,
      Are here right close at hand.

[Illustration: Book Case.]




BOOK SHELVES.


Use a shallow box with a cover which entirely overlaps it, like an
ordinary candy box or a note paper box. For a very small bookcase, use a
box such as druggists use for powders.

1. Study the picture carefully. Notice how one end of the _cover_ is cut
off and then fastened on the top to form the little railing.

2. All the shelves are made from the _box_. If the case is tall enough
for _three_ shelves, use both ends and a piece of the middle.

3. If the case is not tall enough, then make _two_ shelves, using only
the ends.

When fitting the shelves, push the box in as far as it will go; then mark
where it is to be cut off.

4. For books, use the corrugated cardboard in which bottles are packed.
Cut strips of this, making some parts high and some parts low, to look
like a row of books. By painting them different colors, and making little
marks to suggest the titles, they can be made to look very much like
books.

The strips must be cut long enough to be bent back and fastened to the
sides.

[Illustration: Details of Book Case.

    Candy box or note paper box
    Cover—cut small piece from bottom
    Fasten on top—clip corners
    Fit box for shelf
    Mark—cut on dots
    Fit other end of box
    Mark—cut on dots
    Fit middle of box
    Mark—cut on dots
    Fasten shelves
    Shape bottom]


DOLLY’S CORRESPONDENCE

    Cut tooth picks up for pencils,
      And fold small papers, too;
    Tuck these inside the little desk,
      As grown up people do.

    Fit a piece of mother’s blotter
      On the shelf on which you write;
    Lay on this your doll’s note paper,
      Choosing dainty blue or white.

[Illustration: Writing Desk.]




WRITING DESK.


Use the kind of box suggested for the bookcase.

1. Cut the _cover_ the right height for the desk.

2. Fit in the _box_, and slide it up or down until it seems right in
proportions, as in making the dresser.

3. Mark where it is to be cut off. Cut and fasten the parts together.

4. Study the picture; then cut the top and slanting sides.

5. Shape the legs. Fasten the “drawer” with “knobs.”

6. Fit and fasten in the extra cardboard so that it projects and forms
the writing shelf.

7. Use the other end of the box for the inside shelves. Cut these narrow
and fit them carefully. Real pigeon holes can be made by cutting up
penny-in-the-slot caramel boxes, and gluing them into place.

8. Paint to match furniture. Glue a piece of blotter on the writing
shelf.

[Illustration: Details of Writing Desk.

    Candy or note paper box
    Cover—End cut away
    One end of the box fitted in and cut off as in dresser
    Top and legs cut—Drawer front fastened
    Extra piece projecting for writing shelf—other end of box fitted
      in for shelves as in book case]


MAKING FATHER COMFORTABLE.

    Haven’t you often noticed,
      As father sits in his chair,
    How he enjoys the cushions
      As he reads his papers there?

    So try to make some cushions
      Of velvet or silk, and see
    If by stuffing them with cotton,
      Father doll as “comfy” might be.

    Then if, with hands that are skillful,
      You could small “papers” make,
    And place with his chair by the “fire,”
      What comfort he could take!

[Illustration: Morris Chair.]




MORRIS CHAIR.


Use two boxes of the same size. They should be fairly deep and nearly
square. The covers should overlap the boxes only a little.

For large chair use collar boxes.

For very small chair, use jewelry or square pill boxes.

1. Place one _box_ bottom up.

2. Place both _covers_ against the sides; hold with both hands and slide
up or down until the proportions seem right for arms.

3. Mark where they are to be cut off. Cut and fasten the three parts
together.

4. Study the picture to see how the arms are made to look more natural by
cutting away parts of the edges of the covers.

5. Shape the legs and cut the slats.

6. Use extra cardboard for the back. “Score” and bend the lower end, so
fasteners may be put through it into the seat.

7. Make holes at the proper places. Use a meat skewer or a heavy wire
hairpin as the rod against which the back rests.

8. Paint to match furniture. Make cushions.

[Illustration: Details of Morris Chair.

    Two boxes—same size—nearly square
    Extra piece of cardboard for back
    Large chair = collar boxes—Small chair = jewelry boxes
    Invert box for seat
    Fasten covers for sides.
    Portions of cover edges
    cutaway to form arms.
    Shape the legs
    Cut slats in arms.
    Fasten back to seat
    Rod = meat skewer or hair pin]


THE TABLE SCARF.

    Your library table you’ll want to keep smooth,
      And free of all scratches from books;
    Make a scarf then of velvet or linen or felt,
      And see how attractive it looks.

    You can, if you wish, hem both of the ends,
      And embroider or stencil them, too;
    Then, if across the table you lay it,
      The top will keep shiny and new.

[Illustration: Library Table.]




LIBRARY TABLE.


Use two _shallow_ boxes and their covers. Spool boxes might be used, but
caramel boxes would be better.

1. Use both _covers_ for the legs. Cut them the height the table is to be.

2. Turn one _box_ bottom up; fit the two pieces of the covers on the ends
and fasten.

3. Turn the other box bottom up and fit it in from the bottom. Slide it
up or down until the proportions look right for the shelf. Fasten the
shelf at both ends to the legs.

4. Fasten on the projecting top. This may be the cover of a slightly
larger box or of extra cardboard.

5. Shape the legs. You might cut vertical slats in the ends between the
shelf and top.

6. Paint to match furniture.

[Illustration: Details of Library Table.

    Two shallow boxes the same size.
    Caramel or spool boxes
    Cover of slightly larger box or piece of cardboard
    Both covers cut the height of legs.
    One box fastened in for top of table
    Other box fastened lower down for shelf
    Larger cover or cardboard fastened as top of table.]


LITTLE COOKS.

    The oven doors won’t really open,
      But the holes are really there;
    You can play there’s fire in them,
      And your dollies’ meal prepare.

    If you have some little pans,
      And pots and skillets as well,
    And mother lets you have some things,
      What to do with them, I’ll tell.

    Don’t use any water for cooking,
      For that might make a mess;
    Just mix up some little dry things,
      That would be better, I guess.

    If you take some rice or barley,
      Some coffee, beans or tea,
    A fine make-believe supper you’ll have,
      Just try it, and you will see.

[Illustration: Stove.]




STOVE.


Use two boxes of same size, with covers which overlap only a little, like
collar boxes, candy boxes with this kind of cover, baby-shoe boxes or
jewelry boxes.

1. Place one box right side up on _top_ of its cover. Place _between_ the
two an extra cardboard, large enough to project from one end and side.
Fasten through the bottom of box and cardboard, into the cover.

2. Shape the projecting cardboard into front and side hearths. Shape the
legs.

3. Cut six holes in the _other cover_. Use silver half dollar or spool
for pattern. Fasten on the top.

4. Fasten on the oven “doors,” etc. Study the picture to see how the
fasteners have been made to look like hinges, by cutting _two_ little
slits for the prongs, and bending one out flat and then down. The “knobs”
are put through _one_ slit as in the dresser.

5. The pipe is made of a roll of stiff paper or a pasteboard mailing
tube. Push through one hole; if it fits, it will not need to be fastened.

6. Paint it with black enamel.

[Illustration: Details of Stove.

    Two oblong boxes—same size
    Extra piece of cardboard for hearth
    Candy box, baby shoe box or collar box
    One box fastened through its bottom to top of cover—extra cardboard
      between and projecting for hearth.
    Other cover—half dollar used as pattern for holes
    Top fastened on and legs cut.
    Doors fastened on
    Pipe put into hole]


FUN ON A RAINY DAY.

    When the rain comes down, and the wind does blow,
      And indoors we must stay,
    Mother lets us to the nursery go
      And with our boxes play.

    Oh, it’s lots of fun when we’re all alone,
      To make such lovely toys,
    Especially, when the rain beats hard
      And keeps in girls and boys.

[Illustration: Fun on a Rainy Day.]


BEFORE THE FIRE.

    Take some beads of jet and coral,
      And fuzzy white wool for smoke;
    Of course ’tis only a make-believe fire,
      But it’s just as much fun to poke.

    Pull a cozy chair in front of your “fire,”
      Where grandmother doll may sit;
    While all the little dolls ’round her gather,
      That she may tell stories and knit.

    Play it’s Christmas and hang up the stockings,
      If your dolls are fast asleep;
    Fill them with a few little trinkets,
      Which out of the tops will peep.

[Illustration: Fireplace]




FIREPLACE.


Use two chocolate peppermint boxes of the same size, or one peppermint
box and its cover; also a long and _narrow_ cover of some other box.

1. Stand the boxes on their ends. If too tall for the mantel, cut them
off; but be _sure_ to cut off the _tops_, as the bottom ends are needed
to fasten to the hearth.

2. Use extra cover for shelf and fasten the ends to the boxes.

3. Use extra cardboard for hearth and back. “Score” and bend it.

4. Set the mantel _on_ the hearth and close against the back. Let the
back slant out while you fasten through bottoms of mantel into the hearth.

5. Push the back up again and reach _under_ the shelf, to put fasteners
through back edge into the back.

6. Make “mirror” of silver paper or real looking-glass, using extra
cardboard as in the dresser.

7. Use _small_ box and its cover for the grate. Cut slats and legs.
Fasten the back of grate to back of fireplace.

8. Paint grate with black enamel and the “woodwork” like your furniture,
or with white enamel. Paint the hearth and fireplace like brick or tiles.

[Illustration: Details of Fireplace.

    Two chocolate peppermint boxes—same size
    Cover of narrow box for shelf
    Extra cardboard for hearth
    Boxes standing on ends
    Cover fastened as shelf
    Cardboard “scored” and bent for hearth and back
    Boxes fastened through bottoms to hearth _before_ back is fastened up
    Back fastened through back edge of shelf
    “Mirror” as in dresser]


A TINY MUSICIAN.

    Many children practice
      An hour every day,
    Then let your dolly do the same,
      And on this piano play.

    She will need some sheets of music
      With notes so black and small,
    These I’m very sure you’ll make her,
      So that she can play them all.

[Illustration: Piano.]




PIANO.


Use a box with a cover which entirely overlaps, like a writing paper box.

1. Stand the _cover_ on one end; cut it the right height for the piano.

2. Study the picture to see just what parts of the sides and top are to
be cut away.

3. Cut the _box_ the same height as you cut the cover.

4. Carefully study the picture. Notice how the box is made to fit into
the piano, by cutting down the edges of box until they are as deep as “A”
in the picture. Fasten the parts together.

5. Use the other end of the box for the key-board; cut and fit this very
carefully; then fasten with two fasteners at each end.

6. Draw the black and white keys on a strip of white paper or cardboard,
and fasten it on.

7. Cut, “score,” bend and fasten the music rack as shown in the picture.

8. The picture will show you how one prong of each fastener is pushed
through from the _back_, and bent to look like a pedal. The other prong
turns up a little over the edge to make it firm.

9. Paint with rosewood, mahogany or black enamel.

[Illustration: Details of Piano.

    Note paper box.
    Cover—cut height of piano
    Shape sides and top
    Box—cut down to depth of A—fit into cover
    Other end of box fitted and fastened for key-board
    Keys marked—pedals fastened
    Music rack—extra piece.]




CRIB.


Use box and cover, or two boxes, as suggested for the divan.

1. Fasten one on top of the other through their bottoms, as in the divan.

2. Cut the legs.

3. Cut the slats as shown in the picture.

4. Paint with white enamel or gold to look like brass.


GOOD NIGHT.

    Get a little china doll,
      Then make a night-gown white;
    Tuck her in her little crib,
      And kiss her a loving good night.

[Illustration: Crib.]




CHIFFONIER.


Use the same sort of box and cover as suggested for the dresser.

1. Cut the cover the right height for the back.

2. Slide the box up or down as in making the dresser. Make the part
containing the “drawers” higher, and the “mirror” shorter than in the
dresser.

3. Make the “drawers” and “mirror” as in the dresser; also shape the legs.

4. Paint to match the rest of your bedroom furniture.


CANDLE STICKS.

    A simple scarf upon the top
      Is all you really need,
    Unless you make some candle sticks,
      And these are cute indeed.

    Just take a spool and paper firm,
      Red worsted use for light;
    The paper ’round it smoothly roll,
      Till in the hole it’s tight.

[Illustration: Chiffonier.]




KITCHEN CABINET.


Use a box with a cover entirely overlapping it, like a candy or writing
paper box.

1. Cut the _cover_ the right height for the back.

2. Study carefully the proportions of the cabinet shown in the picture;
then cut pieces from the sides and top as in the piano.

3. Slide the _box_ up to the point where the sides are cut out. Mark, cut
off the bottom and fasten the parts together.

4. Use the other end of the box for the shelves, as in the bookcase.
Fasten them in.

5. Cut pieces of cardboard for the “drawer” and “doors”; then fasten them
on with “knobs” and “hinges.” Shape the legs.

6. Paint some color suitable for a kitchen. Possibly someone might show
you how to “grain” it.


“SUGAR AND SPICE AND ALL THINGS NICE.”

    Lace paper from candy boxes
      Can be used upon the shelves;
    Paint and print on spools some labels,
      And arrange them all yourselves.

    Then when you play you’re little cooks,
      How nice ’twill be to see
    Your shelves with sugar, salt and spice,
      In rows so orderly.

[Illustration: Kitchen Cabinet.]


GETTING SUPPER.

    Surely, I couldn’t be lonesome
      With dolly right here in her chair;
    With my stove, my table and dishes,
      Her supper I now shall prepare.

[Illustration: Getting Supper.]




PARLOR CHAIR.


Use the kind of box suggested for the arm chair.

1. Make this exactly as you made the arm chair, until you are ready to
shape the legs and back.

2. Study the picture and you will see that there are no arms, and no
slats between the legs. Notice how the back is cut.

3. Paint mahogany, oak or rosewood like the rest of your parlor
furniture. You might paint one with white enamel for your bedroom, or
with gold as a fancy parlor chair.


THE LITTLE UPHOLSTERER.

    When your parlor chairs are finished,
      With varnish make them shine;
    Then on the seats glue velvet,
      If you wish them ’specially fine.

[Illustration: Chair.]




HALL RACK.


Use the kind of box suggested for the dresser and chiffonier.

1. Cut the _cover_ the right height for the back.

2. Slide the _box_ up or down until the proportions are right.

3. Cut off the bottom and fasten the parts together.

4. Shape the legs. Fasten on the “drawer” with “knobs.” Cut the slats and
hole for “mirror.”

5. Fasten on an extra cardboard, putting either a silver paper “mirror”
or a real looking-glass between it and the back. The fasteners should
be pushed through from the _back_. Look carefully to see how the little
prongs are bent and curved to form little hooks.


TIDY CHILDREN.

    The little hooks are very small,
      Yet are strong enough to safely use;
    So you can hang up dollies’ hats,
      And their jackets and furs, if you choose.

    It will be very wise indeed,
      To teach your dolls as mother taught you,
    That tidy children always remember,
      To hang up clothes as grown-ups do.

[Illustration: Hall Rack.]




HIGH CHAIR.


Use a corset box.

1. Cut seat and back from opposite ends of box as in arm chair. Make the
back about 8½ inches and the seat about 5 inches.

2. Fasten parts together near the seat and at the bottom (the other
fasteners on sides hold the foot rest which will be put in _later_.)

3. Shape the arms, back and legs. Be _sure_ to have one slat on the sides
where the foot rest is to be (about 1½ inches below the seat).

4. From the two ends of the _cover_, cut two pieces about 4 inches long
for the tray and foot rest. The edges are too deep for the proportions of
the chair, so must be _carefully_ cut down about one-half.

5. Cut away all but about 1 inch of _bottom_ of foot rest. The projecting
pieces must be pushed _between_ the other two parts and fastened as shown
in picture.

6. The tray is the same shape, but about ½ inch _more_ of its _bottom_
must be left. When the projecting ends are pivoted to the sides by two
fasteners or a wire hairpin, that extra half-inch of bottom will rest on
the front corners of the arms, and keep the tray level. The tray can be
moved up and down as on a real high chair.

[Illustration: High Chair.]


WHEN BABY DOLL IS HUNGRY.

    If your baby doll is hungry,
      Set him in his new high chair;
    Put his bowl upon the tray,
      So that he can reach it there.

    You can play he has some milk
      In the bowl for shredded wheat;
    If you’re careful not to spill it,
      With some sugar make it sweet.

[Illustration: When Baby Is Hungry.]




TABOURET AND PALM.


Use the kind of box in which bottles of shoe dressing are packed—tall,
with nearly square top and a cover which entirely overlaps it.

1. Cut a piece of the cover the right height; shape the legs. If you
haven’t a box of this kind, a peppermint box and its cover can be used,
by cutting off an end of each and fastening them together, as shown in
the picture.

2. Fasten on an extra piece of cardboard, which will project for the top.

3. Use an empty twist spool for the “jardiniere.” Cut a strip of green
paper the height you wish your plant to be; roll this firmly so it will
just fit, and stand up in the hole of the spool.

4. With sharp point of scissors cut down the roll in several places.
Spread out and shape the “leaves.”

5. Fasten in some _small_ artificial flowers, or stick in toothpicks or
straws, with bits of bright paper tied or glued on like flowers.


A LITTLE FLORIST.

    Gild your spool to look like brass,
      And paint your leaves a pretty green;
    Fasten a small artificial flower,
      Like those on growing plants you’ve seen.

[Illustration: Tabouret and Palm.]




SCREEN.


Use three pieces of cardboard cut from bottoms or covers of boxes.

1. Hinge the pieces together at their edges with thread, wire or ribbon.

2. Cut out the slats at the top.

3. Cut out the three large holes and gather in silk or muslin; _or_ paste
pretty paper or figured cloth flat on the cardboard; _or_ paint flowers
or landscape right on the cardboard.

4. Paint the “wooden” parts gold or white.


THE PARLOR SCREEN.

    If the screen in your parlor you use,
      You might burnish it all with gold;
    Then colored silk so pretty and bright,
      On each of the sides you might fold.

    But if in the bedroom it finds a place,
      White enamel is better to use;
    Then for each side, instead of the silk,
      Some dainty white muslin I’d choose.

[Illustration: Screen.]




WASH TUB AND BENCH.


For the bench use a long, narrow and _shallow_ box and its cover. For a
small bench use a spool box; for a larger one, a stocking box.

1. Use the _box_ for the legs, and the _cover_ for the top.

For the tub use a pasteboard ribbon “bolt.” For a larger tub, use one of
the fancy miniature hat boxes used for silk flowers.

1. Cut out the top of the ribbon “bolt.”

2. Paint black “hoops” and little vertical lines to show the strips of
wood of which a tub is made.

3. Make handles out of hairpins. Use thread to bind a tiny strip of paper
around the wire for the “wooden” part of the handle.

For the washboard use part of the cover of a jewelry, corset or shoe box,
according to the size of the tub.

1. Cut the cover the right length; then cut the “legs.”

2. If the board is large enough, fasten on a piece of corrugated
cardboard; if it is small, draw lines to suggest that part.

3. From a scrap of soap, whittle out a little “bar.”


WASH DAY.

    The tub is made only of pasteboard,
      So water you can’t really use,
    But a cute little “bar” you can whittle,
      From a scrap of real soap if you choose.

[Illustration: Wash Tub and Bench.]




CRADLE.


Use any box of the right proportions—jewelry, candy or shoe box.

1. Fold a piece of paper and cut a pattern of the end with the rocker.
Cut several until one fits your box and will _rock_.

2. Lay pattern on cardboard; then draw and cut two ends.

3. Fasten these as shown in the picture. If the cradle is a large one,
use very heavy cardboard or fasten several thicknesses together, so that
it will be strong enough to be played with.

4. Paint with white enamel.

[Illustration: Cradle.]


ROCK-A-BY BABY.

    In this cradle clean and white,
      Our baby doll will sleep;
    We’ll tuck her blanket snug and tight,
      So nice and warm she’ll keep.

    Then with one little finger,
      Rock it gently to and fro,
    And softly hum a lullaby—
      Don’t mothers do just so?

[Illustration: Rock-a-By-Baby.]




UMBRELLA STAND.


Use the kind of box suggested for the tabouret.

1. Cut off the box the right height. If peppermint boxes are used, fasten
the pieces of box and cover together, as shown in the picture.

2. Cut the slats.

3. Paint with gold to look like brass, or with a color to represent wood
or porcelain.


DOLLY’S UMBRELLA.

    Whittle a stick for a handle,
      Paint it a nice dark brown,
    ’Round it twist some soft, black paper
      And firmly bind it down.

    This umbrella will not open,
      So let’s hope it will not rain.
    But don’t you think it will look cunning
      In the stand with a little cane?

[Illustration: Umbrella Stand.]




PIANO BENCH.


You might find a small box just the right size and shape. Turn it bottom
up and cut the legs.

You might have to cut ends from the box and cover of a candy box, and
fasten them together as shown in the picture.


PLAYING THE PIANO.

    Before the piano, not too far away,
    Place the bench so dolly may sit there to play;
    In order that she may do this with ease,
    Place her hands so that lightly they rest on the keys.

[Illustration: Piano Bench.]




CLOCK.


Use the kind of box described for the tabouret, or box and cover of a
peppermint box cut the right height and fastened together.

1. Use a silver dollar or end of large spool as pattern for the face.
Mark the face directly on the box, or make it on white paper and glue it
on.

2. Cut the legs and openings.

3. Make the pendulum of cardboard and long enough to extend up into the
top.

4. Cut hands of pasteboard or bits of tin.

5. Push a long pin or wire hairpin through the hands, middle of face, top
of pendulum and back of the clock. Bend the end of the wire down. You can
then move the hands and swing the pendulum.

6. You might put a fastener into the lower end of the pendulum and
double the prongs out of sight. This looks attractive and also makes the
pendulum heavier so that it swings better.


TICK-TOCK, TICK-TOCK.

    It surely would be lots of fun
      If our clock could really go;
    But let’s just push the pendulum,
      To make it swing to and fro.

[Illustration]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN MOTHER LETS US MAKE PAPER BOX FURNITURE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


